# Introduction

The distribution and survival of invertebrate species are governed by a
complex interplay of biotic and abiotic factors. Biotic interactions
shape community dynamics through competition for resources, predation
pressure, parasitism, and mutualistic relationships. For example,
predators can exert strong indirect effects on prey populations through
[prey]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T22:28:06.482Z"} behavioral avoidance strategies that
alter habitat use and activity patterns (Blois-Heulin et al. 1990).
Parasites can manipulate host behavior to enhance their own
transmission, often through neuromodulatory mechanisms that alter
microhabitat selection (Lafferty and Shaw 2013). Recent work using DNA
metabarcoding has confirmed that predator size and species identity are
key drivers structuring highly diverse terrestrial invertebrate
communities (Miller-ter Kuile et al. 2022).[]{.paragraph-insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T22:28:45.717Z"}

While these biotic interactions profoundly influence community assembly,
abiotic conditions often set the fundamental limits determining where
invertebrates can persist. Temperature fundamentally constrains
invertebrate physiology across all latitudes, from Antarctic midges
(*Belgica antarctica*) that survive repeated freeze-thaw cycles through
cryoprotective dehydration (Everatt et al. 2015), to desert land snails
(*Sphincterochila boissieri*) that tolerate internal temperatures up to
55°C through metabolic downregulation and behavioral thermoregulation
(Schweizer, Triebskorn, and Köhler 2019). In marine systems, temperature
acts as the primary driver of larval development rates, creating
predictable latitudinal gradients in reproductive timing and dispersal
potential ([why caps?]{.comment-start id="301080129"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:29:35"}HOEGH-GULDBERG and PEARSE[]{.comment-end
id="301080129"} 1995). Rising temperatures mechanistically increase
metabolic rates and respiratory water loss, creating compound stress in
warming environments (Chown, Sørensen, and Terblanche 2011). Water
availability shapes invertebrate communities from molecular to ecosystem
levels, with stream macroinvertebrates exhibiting rapid recolonization
strategies in ephemeral systems where rainfall controls hydrological
disturbance regimes (Carvallo et al. 2022). Terrestrial invertebrates
display remarkable water stress adaptations, from desert beetles that
harvest fog water (Chown, Sørensen, and Terblanche 2011) to soil
invertebrates employing cryoprotective dehydration to avoid tissue
freezing (Holmstrup, Bayley, and Ramløv 2002). Cave arthropods require
near-saturation humidity, with species composition shifting as relative
humidity fluctuates daily in twilight zones (Mammola and Isaia 2018).
Solar radiation structures communities through both physiological
impacts and behavioral effects. In intertidal zones, high solar
radiation proves lethal to early life stages through synergistic
interactions with heat and desiccation stress (Gosselin and Jones 2010;
Chapperon et al. 2016). Army ants demonstrate habitat-specific evolution
of critical thermal maxima tied to insolation exposure (Baudier et al.
2018), while terrestrial gastropods climb vertical surfaces to escape
ground-level heat and evolve reflective pigmentation in sun-exposed
populations (Schweizer, Triebskorn, and Köhler 2019). Solar cycles drive
activity patterns from diurnal butterflies synchronizing with daylight
to subtidal invertebrates timing nocturnal emergence to avoid visual
predators (Saigusa 2001).[]{.paragraph-insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T22:32:21.851Z"}

Among these abiotic factors, wind emerges as a particularly complex
environmental force shaping invertebrate ecology.[]{.paragraph-deletion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T22:32:26.346Z"}

Wind influences invertebrate behavior and ecology through diverse
mechanisms that vary across species and life stages. Some species
exploit wind for dispersal, such as spiders that exhibit heritable
variation in ballooning motivation based on wind velocity thresholds
(Bonte and Lens 2007). Other invertebrates respond to wind as an
environmental stressor, with herbivorous larvae moving to leeward sides
of leaves to maintain feeding efficiency when exposed to turbulent
conditions (Leonard, McArthur, and Hochuli 2016). Cockroaches
demonstrate clear behavioral thresholds, shifting from upwind
orientation to crosswind escape when wind speeds exceed specific
velocities (Bell and Kramer 1979). Beyond simple average speeds, wind's
effects depend on its multidimensional characteristics including
consistency, gustiness, and turbulence patterns. Understanding
long-distance biological transport through air requires knowledge of
turbulent deviations from mean flow, not just average conditions (Nathan
et al. 2005). Species-specific thresholds trigger distinct behavioral
responses, from [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="1663268450" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:34:28"}foraging cessation to microhabitat shifts to
active dispersal[]{.comment-end id="1663268450"}. This complexity in
wind-organism interactions becomes particularly evident when examining
species that must navigate multiple life stages with different
environmental exposures.

Many invertebrates exploit habitats where other organisms, particularly
plants, modify local abiotic conditions to create more favorable
microclimates. Forest canopies exemplify this phenomenon by moderating
environmental extremes within their three-dimensional structure. [seems
like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1422761219"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:35:01"}Trees
[]{.comment-end id="1422761219"}reduce wind speeds through physical
baffling, with dense canopies capable of reducing wind penetration by
over 90% compared to open areas. Light exposure becomes filtered and
heterogeneous, creating a mosaic of sun flecks and shade that shifts
throughout the [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="1037811058" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:35:13"}day[]{.comment-end id="1037811058"}.
Temperature fluctuations are buffered, with forest interiors
experiencing cooler maximum temperatures during the day and warmer
minimum temperatures at night compared to adjacent open [seems like this
needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1639269494"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:35:27"}areas[]{.comment-end id="1639269494"}.
Humidity remains elevated through reduced evaporation and continuous
transpiration from [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="353212816" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:35:44"}foliage[]{.comment-end id="353212816"}. This
moderation of environmental conditions by vegetation structure creates
distinct microclimates that can differ dramatically from regional
conditions, [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="1658463192" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:35:58"}enabling species to persist[]{.comment-end
id="1658463192"} in areas that would otherwise exceed their
physiological tolerances. The creation and exploitation of these
modified environments is fundamental to understanding habitat selection
patterns in many invertebrate species.

The monarch butterfly (*Danaus plexippus*) presents an exceptional
system for studying how abiotic factors, particularly wind, influence
invertebrate ecology across complex life histories. This species
undergoes one of nature's most remarkable migrations, with individuals
traveling thousands of kilometers between breeding and overwintering
[seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1337628775"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:36:34"}grounds[]{.comment-end id="1337628775"}.
Throughout their annual cycle, monarchs experience dramatically
different environmental conditions: from temperate breeding habitats to
subtropical overwintering sites, from open meadows to dense forest
groves, from solitary existence to massive aggregations. Their clear
behavioral responses to temperature, light, wind, and other abiotic
factors [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1785764593"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:36:59"}have been
documented []{.comment-end id="1785764593"}across multiple life stages.
This combination of complex life history, long-distance movement, and
observable responses to environmental conditions makes monarchs an ideal
model for examining how invertebrates navigate heterogeneous abiotic
landscapes.

Individual monarch development proceeds through complete metamorphosis
with each stage exhibiting [Ashley has a ton of references on this
across the lifestages]{.comment-start id="1326369225"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:37:41"}specific
thermal requirements and tolerances[]{.comment-end id="1326369225"}.
Temperature governs development rates from egg through adult emergence,
with development accelerating within physiological limits as
temperatures increase. During the breeding phase, monarchs produce
multiple generations per year, with three to four generations typical in
northern portions of their range. Each generation exploits milkweed
(*Asclepias* spp.) as larvae spread across an expanding geographic range
following spring warming. This obligate relationship with milkweed
constrains breeding opportunities, as larvae require these plants both
for nutrition and for sequestering cardiac glycosides that provide
chemical defense against predators. Milkweed distribution and phenology,
in turn, depend on temperature and precipitation patterns. During
favorable conditions, rapid reproduction enables population growth, with
individual females capable of laying hundreds of eggs. Temperature
limits both larval development and adult flight activity, while
precipitation affects milkweed quality and nectar availability from
adult food sources. Photoperiod provides critical seasonal cues,
signaling when environmental conditions will soon become unsuitable for
continued [this whole paragraph needs references to support the
statements. Either you could have a string of them in an opening
sentence, or individual sets of references for each of the
statements.]{.comment-start id="983949733"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:38:41"}breeding[]{.comment-end id="983949733"}.

As autumn approaches, decreasing photoperiod and cooling temperatures
trigger a [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="20728339"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:38:56"}remarkable
physiological []{.comment-end id="20728339"}transformation in the final
summer generation. These environmental cues, combined with [seems like
this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1213980179"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:39:13"}declining
milkweed quality[]{.comment-end id="1213980179"}, induce reproductive
diapause [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="2133575755"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:39:22"}through
juvenile hormone suppression[]{.comment-end id="2133575755"}. This
hormonal shift halts reproductive development and initiates a suite of
changes that create a \"super generation\" adapted for long-distance
migration and extended survival. Monarchs accumulate lipids [seems like
this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1926852413"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:39:44"}up to 125% of
their lean body weight, storing energy reserves[]{.comment-end
id="1926852413"} that must sustain them through migration and months of
overwintering. [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="1544615537" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:39:58"}Their lifespan extends from the typical 2-5
weeks of breeding adults to 8-9 months[]{.comment-end id="1544615537"}.
[seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="504858221"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:40:19"}Body size
increases, with larger wings providing enhanced flight capacity. Perhaps
most remarkably, oriented flight behavior emerges, enabling navigation
across thousands of kilometers to specific overwintering
locations[]{.comment-end id="504858221"}. These coordinated changes
prepare monarchs for the energetic demands of migration and the extended
period of reproductive dormancy during overwintering.

Overwintering represents a critical phase in the monarch annual cycle,
driven by the unsuitability of breeding habitat during winter months.
[seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1879605031"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:40:44"}Persistent
freezing temperatures across northern breeding ranges would kill adults,
while milkweed senesces and disappears from the landscape, making
reproduction impossible even if adults could survive[]{.comment-end
id="1879605031"}. Eastern monarch populations migrate to high-elevation
[seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1057624735"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:40:53"}Oyamel fir
forests[]{.comment-end id="1057624735"} in central Mexico, where tens of
millions of individuals concentrate in forest patches totaling less than
30 hectares. [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="782381811" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:41:12"}Western populations migrate to coastal
California sites, primarily roosting in introduced eucalyptus groves but
also utilizing native conifers and other trees.[]{.comment-end
id="782381811"} The overwintering period extends 4-5 months, [seems like
this needs ref(s) some nectaring also occurs on the wintering
ground]{.comment-start id="878770559" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:41:38"}during which monarchs must survive
exclusively on lipid reserves accumulated during autumn
migration[]{.comment-end id="878770559"}. Survival requires avoiding
multiple threats including predation, freezing, and desiccation while
maintaining energy balance without significant feeding opportunities. To
meet these challenges, monarchs form dense aggregations containing
thousands to millions of individuals. [seems like this needs
ref(s)]{.comment-start id="458859065" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:42:33"}Clustering[]{.comment-end id="458859065"}
reduces individual surface area exposure to environmental extremes,
provides thermal benefits through reduced convective heat loss, and
offers protection from predators through dilution effects and collective
vigilance. However, storms can devastate entire aggregations,
temperature fluctuations can trigger premature lipid depletion, and
concentrated populations become vulnerable to disease transmission and
localized habitat degradation.

Early research on monarch overwintering sites in the 1970s and 1980s
focused primarily on understanding the thermal benefits of clustering
behavior, particularly in Mexican overwintering sites where freezing
represents a major mortality [seems like this needs
ref(s)]{.comment-start id="35734609" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:43:09"}source[]{.comment-end id="35734609"}.
Researchers recognized that forest structure played a crucial role in
protecting butterflies from environmental [seems like this needs
ref(s)]{.comment-start id="926669265" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:43:20"}extremes[]{.comment-end id="926669265"}.
Building on these observations, Leong synthesized field observations
from California overwintering sites into a formal \"microclimate
hypothesis\" in 1990 (Kingston. L. H. Leong 1990). This hypothesis
proposed that monarchs select groves providing a specific envelope of
suitable abiotic conditions. The original parameters included mild
temperatures averaging 13°C to keep butterflies below their flight
threshold and minimize metabolic expenditure, high humidity to prevent
desiccation during months without drinking water, dappled sunlight
allowing thermoregulation without triggering dispersal from clusters,
and critically, protection from wind speeds exceeding 2 m/s to prevent
physical disruption of aggregations. The underlying principle suggested
that all these conditions work synergistically to minimize metabolic
expenditure, thereby conserving precious lipid reserves. This conceptual
framework quickly gained widespread adoption, becoming the foundation
for [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1640779931"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:44:17"}management
guidelines[]{.comment-end id="1640779931"} at overwintering sites
throughout California.

Over the subsequent decades, empirical research has systematically
challenged most components of the original microclimate hypothesis,
revealing a more complex and scale-dependent pattern of habitat
selection. The temperature component has proven particularly
problematic. Saniee and Villablanca (2022) found no significant
temperature differences within groves at the scale of tens of meters,
contradicting the assumption that monarchs select specific thermal
microsites. Instead, temperature varies predictably with latitude across
California's overwintering range, spanning an 8-18°C gradient from south
to north. This suggests monarchs exhibit flexible thermal tolerance
rather than requiring a fixed temperature regime. The humidity component
has similarly failed empirical tests, with no meaningful variation
detected at the grove scale and vapor pressure deficit showing little
variation among roost sites. Perhaps most significantly, Fisher et al.
(2018) demonstrated that regional macroclimate variables, particularly
minimum December temperature, better predict grove occurrence than local
microclimate conditions. This shift from microclimate to macroclimate
causation fundamentally challenges the scale at which we understand
habitat selection. Among the original parameters, only light exposure
has received consistent empirical support. Weiss et al. (1991)
documented that permanent overwintering sites cluster around
approximately 20% canopy openness, while transient [(used for only the
innitial part of the overwintering season)]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T22:45:50.074Z"} and
abandoned sites show much greater variability. Saniee and Villablanca
(2022) confirmed significant light differences at actual butterfly
clustering locations within groves[, versus unused locations]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T22:46:21.361Z"}. Yet
remarkably, the wind protection component, despite being invoked as
critical for management, has never received direct empirical testing in
over 30 years since its proposal.

The development of the disruptive wind hypothesis followed a trajectory
of increasingly strong claims based solely on correlational
observations. Leong's initial 1990 work noted that occupied trees
experienced lower wind speeds than unoccupied trees (Kingston. L. H.
Leong 1990). Subsequent multivariate analysis in 1991 reinforced this
pattern, showing wind speed as a significant variable distinguishing
occupied from unoccupied locations. By 1999, restoration success at Los
Osos was attributed primarily to enhanced wind protection. In 2004,
Leong elevated wind to a primary importance in site selection. Finally,
in 2016, management guidelines codified the specific 2 m/s threshold as
a critical standard (K. L. H. Leong 2016). [this would be a great place
to literally quote from Leong]{.comment-start id="1000829468"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:47:38"}The
hypothesis specifically asserts that winds exceeding 2 m/s physically
dislodge butterflies from clusters, trigger energetically costly escape
responses, and create unsuitable overwintering conditions[]{.comment-end
id="1000829468"}. However, these conclusions rest entirely on
correlational observations comparing occupied and unoccupied sites. This
methodology cannot establish causation, as multiple environmental
variables covary in nature. No study has documented whether monarchs
actually abandon roosts when winds exceed the threshold, whether any
abandonment is temporary or permanent, or whether presumed energetic
costs actually occur. The analysis also ignored wind complexity,
considering only average speeds while overlooking gustiness, turbulence,
and temporal variability that may be equally or more important. Despite
these limitations, the 2 m/s threshold has been adopted in federal and
state management guidelines, shapes restoration designs at sites like
Ellwood Mesa and Pismo Beach, and influences allocation of millions of
conservation dollars for windbreak plantings[seems like this needs
ref(s)]{.comment-start id="178424181" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:48:40"}.[]{.comment-end id="178424181"}

The urgency for evidence-based monarch conservation has intensified with
catastrophic population declines. Western monarch populations have
declined to less than 5% of 1980s abundance levels, with some analyses
suggesting even steeper declines exceeding 95% (Pelton et al. 2019). The
population faces quasi-extinction risk, having crossed threshold levels
below which stochastic events could eliminate remaining individuals
(Schultz et al. 2017). These declines prompted the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service to propose federal listing as a threatened species with
critical habitat designation in 2024 (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2024). While the total monarch breeding range spans much of North
America, making comprehensive management logistically impossible,
overwintering sites represent a critical bottleneck comprising less than
0.001% of the total range. California's overwintering habitat is
confined to a narrow 1.6 km coastal strip where specific climatic
conditions [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="1517031227"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:49:37"}occur[]{.comment-end id="1517031227"}. The
concentration of the [seems like this needs ref(s)]{.comment-start
id="864789281" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:49:53"}entire western population into approximately
400 sites for 4-5 months[]{.comment-end id="864789281"} creates both
vulnerability and opportunity. Each surviving female [seems like this
needs ref(s)]{.comment-start id="6658013"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:50:10"}can lay 400+
eggs, providing exponential growth potential if overwintering survival
is high[]{.comment-end id="6658013"}. [seems like this needs
ref(s)]{.comment-start id="714662846" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-25T15:50:22"}The starting population size after winter
directly determines breeding season success.[]{.comment-end
id="714662846"} These sites also provide the only reliable opportunity
for population monitoring through standardized counts. Over 50% of
overwintering habitat occurs on state park lands, enabling coordinated
management through established partnerships. [This is fairly redundant.
I suggest eliminating, or at least trimming it, and keeping only what
you need to get to the transition that correlated attributes need to be
controlled for.]{.comment-start id="985757212"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-25T15:51:42"}Current
management strategies rely heavily on assumptions from the microclimate
hypothesis, with special emphasis on achieving wind protection below the
2 m/s threshold. Major restoration investments totaling millions of
dollars focus on establishing windbreaks and enhancing canopy cover
based on these untested assumptions.

The critical gap in monarch conservation science is that the wind
disruption hypothesis drives management decisions affecting millions of
conservation dollars yet has never been empirically tested. The
hypothesis has been accepted as fact for three decades without any study
establishing causal relationships between wind exposure and butterfly
behavior. Correlational observations comparing occupied and unoccupied
sites cannot determine causation because multiple environmental factors
covary in natural settings. []{.comment-end id="985757212"}Confounding
variables must be controlled to isolate wind effects: solar radiation
triggers thermoregulation independent of wind, temperature affects
activity thresholds regardless of wind exposure, time of day creates
predictable activity patterns, and social dynamics influence clustering
behavior. Previous analyses considered only average wind speeds,
ignoring the complexity of wind characteristics that may determine
biological impacts. Maximum speeds may trigger escape responses even if
averages remain low, consistency versus gustiness likely affects energy
expenditure differently, and turbulence patterns may be more disruptive
than laminar flow at the same speed. Nathan et al. (2005) emphasized
that understanding biological responses to wind requires examining
deviations from mean flow, not just averages. With western monarch
populations facing potential extinction, the stakes for evidence-based
management have never been higher. Ineffective restoration based on
untested assumptions wastes limited conservation resources and time that
declining populations cannot afford.

To our knowledge, this study provides the first direct empirical test of
whether wind disrupts overwintering monarch butterflies. Our primary
objective was to evaluate the foundational 2 m/s wind disruption
threshold that has guided three decades of conservation practice. We
employed continuous monitoring at 30-minute intervals throughout the
overwintering season, simultaneously measuring wind speed, temperature,
and solar radiation at butterfly clustering locations. This approach
enabled direct observation of butterfly responses to changing
environmental conditions while controlling for confounding variables. We
analyzed the data using an information-theoretic framework that compared
multiple competing models to identify the strongest predictors of
butterfly movement.

We tested three hierarchical hypotheses about wind effects on monarch
clustering behavior. First, we hypothesized that wind, alongside other
environmental factors (temperature, solar exposure, time of day),
predicts changes in butterfly abundance at clusters. If true, we predict
that wind will emerge as a significant predictor in model selection,
with higher wind speeds associated with decreased monarch abundance.
Second, we hypothesized that wind becomes specifically disruptive above
the 2 m/s threshold proposed by Leong. If this threshold represents a
meaningful biological boundary, we predict a discontinuous response in
butterfly abundance, with stable clusters below 2 m/s and increasing
departures above this speed. Third, we hypothesized that wind's
disruptive effects scale with intensity above the threshold. If true, we
predict a dose-response relationship where progressively higher wind
speeds cause proportionally greater reductions in cluster abundance. The
results of these tests will provide the evidence-based foundation
necessary for effective conservation of remaining western monarch
populations.

## Materials and Methods

### Study Site

Site selection followed a systematic filtering process driven by project
requirements and practical constraints. The study was supported by a
federal grant that mandated research be conducted on federal lands. We
selected Vandenberg Space Force Base (VSFB, 34.7398°N, 120.5725°W) in
Santa Barbara County, California, based on several key advantages: mild
winters with infrequent frost events, extensive historical plantings of
blue gum eucalyptus (*Eucalyptus globulus*) that have created suitable
overwintering habitat throughout the installation, and restricted access
that provided security for long-term equipment deployment. The base
contains thirty documented monarch overwintering groves, with several
sites consistently ranking within the top 10% of population counts
statewide over the past decade (Xerces Society 2025a).

Working with the base's monarch conservation coordinator, we initially
screened twelve locations from the thirty sites based on their
documented capacity to support monarch aggregations and provide
year-round access. This collaboration leveraged local expertise from
managing Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count activities for multiple
years (Xerces Society 2025a). During the study period, ten of these
sites were actively monitored. However, due to low monarch populations
during the 2023-2024 season and no observed overwintering behavior in
the 2024-2025 season, only two sites (Spring Canyon and UDMH) produced
measurable butterfly clusters suitable for our analysis.

Spring Canyon (34.6315°N, 120.6182°W) represents the most productive and
historically reliable overwintering site on VSFB. Located in South Base
within 300 meters of Space Launch Complex 4, this approximately
2.0-hectare site consists entirely of mature blue gum eucalyptus trees
reaching heights of approximately 40 meters. An unnamed perennial creek
runs through the center of the grove, creating a riparian corridor that
supports heterogeneous canopy structure with variable tree spacing and
diverse understory vegetation. Surf Road, an infrequently used paved
access road, bisects both the perennial creek and forest canopy.

The UDMH site (34.6719°N, 120.5950°W), also located in South Base,
comprises a 5.1-hectare eucalyptus grove planted in windrows adjacent to
a waste treatment facility. The uniformly spaced trees maintain a
largely clear understory with scattered low shrubs. Although only
recently documented as an overwintering location in 2022, UDMH
immediately emerged as a significant site, supporting over 6,000
monarchs during its initial count and ranking among the base's highest
population sites.

### Monitoring Strategy

Equipment deployment strategies differed between monitoring seasons to
accommodate research objectives and field experience. During the
2023-2024 season, we employed two strategies: targeted deployments at
sites with confirmed monarch presence, and anticipatory deployments at
locations where monarchs were expected based on historical data but not
currently observed. Targeted deployments concentrated at Spring Canyon
and UDMH where active aggregations were documented throughout the
season. Anticipatory deployments occurred at four overwintering sites:
additional locations within Spring Canyon and UDMH, plus SLC-6 and
Tangair. No monarchs were recorded at anticipatory deployment sites;
consequently, these data are excluded from analysis.

Building on insights from the initial season, for the 2024-2025 season
we modified our approach to establish monitoring stations at ten sites
before monarch arrival, based on historical occurrence records compiled
by the base conservation coordinator. This expanded spatial coverage
aimed to capture greater environmental variation across potential
overwintering sites. However, the 2024-2025 season coincided with
historically low monarch abundance throughout California (Xerces Society
2025b), resulting in no observed clustering behavior at any monitored
location on base. Consequently, our final dataset comprises two sites
(Spring Canyon and UDMH) from the 2023-2024 season only.

### Field Equipment

To observe changes in monarch abundance in response to strong wind
events, we deployed remote monitoring equipment near butterfly clusters
at overwintering sites. Field observations utilized 15-meter telescoping
fiberglass poles (Max-Gain Systems, Inc., Marietta, GA) anchored at
three points using ground anchors with guy lines securing both the top
and base to create stable, freestanding structures.

Poles were positioned 4-17 meters from cluster locations. This range,
determined through field testing, balanced image resolution requirements
for our grid-based counting method against disturbance minimization.
Closer positioning compromised field of view, while greater distances
degraded butterfly visibility below classification thresholds. Pole
placement considered ground stability for the 15-meter structures,
infrastructure clearance requirements, and clear viewing angles. When
deploying near active clusters, we approached from directions that
minimized disturbance; no butterfly dispersal was observed during
equipment deployment.

We monitored monarch abundance using modified trail cameras (GardePro E7
and E8, Shenzhen, China) configured for near-infrared imaging to enhance
contrast between clustering butterflies and surrounding vegetation.
Trail cameras were selected for their durability in extended field
deployment, native time-lapse functionality, and modification potential.
Near-infrared wavelength selection followed previous literature
demonstrating effectiveness for butterfly population estimation (Hristov
et al. 2019).

Hardware modifications exploited the camera's internal filter-switching
mechanism by engaging nighttime mode to access the clear glass filter
position, then disconnecting power to prevent reversion to the infrared
cut filter. Near-infrared pass filters (\>850 nm) were mounted
externally to restrict incoming light to NIR wavelengths. This
configuration produced images where clustering butterflies appeared as
dark masses against bright eucalyptus foliage reflectance in the
near-infrared spectrum. Field validation confirmed sufficient contrast
for visual distinction of monarch clusters from background vegetation,
supporting our human-labeler analytical approach.

Cameras were mounted atop poles using lightweight tie-down straps and
positioned horizontally toward butterfly clusters at roosting height.
The wireless live view feature enabled real-time preview and precise
camera aiming during deployment. Cameras operated in time-lapse mode
with motion detection disabled.

Sampling interval selection balanced temporal resolution, battery life,
and data processing feasibility through empirical optimization and
rigorous statistical validation. Initial deployments used 10-minute
intervals to capture significant changes in butterfly abundance, which
preliminary observations indicated occurred on hourly rather than minute
scales, while maintaining approximately 6-week continuous operation.
Post-deployment statistical analysis using mixed-effects models and
information-theoretic approaches systematically compared multiple
sampling intervals across deployments. We conducted sequential subsample
analyses starting with full temporal resolution and progressively
testing reduced frequencies. Information-theoretic model comparison
using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) demonstrated that 30-minute
intervals provided optimal balance, losing less than 5% of information
compared to full temporal resolution (measured by root mean square
error) while reducing image classification workload by 67%. Variance
comparison analysis and visual assessment of fitted trend lines
confirmed that this interval preserved essential time-series patterns
including diurnal activity cycles, weather-response dynamics, and
multi-day population trends. Battery life constraints and field
deployment logistics further supported this interval choice, enabling
extended autonomous operation essential for capturing complete
behavioral sequences during variable weather conditions.

To quantify the wind conditions hypothesized to influence butterfly
behavior, wind monitoring equipment consisted of Rain Wise WindLog Wind
Data Loggers (Rain Wise Inc., Trenton, Maine) installed at pole apices
to measure wind at heights approximating butterfly roosting locations.
These instruments recorded average wind speed and maximum wind gust at
one-minute intervals, the highest frequency supported by the sensors.
This recording interval enabled calculation of wind speed variance
within each photographic sampling period, capturing gustiness lost with
longer averaging periods.

To systematically organize our heterogeneous monitoring efforts, we
defined discrete monitoring periods as deployment units. Each deployment
represented a unique combination of monitoring location, camera
configuration (including camera ID, mounting height, and viewing angle),
associated wind measurements, and temporal coverage period. Since
equipment was frequently reused across locations and time periods, this
deployment-based structure provided standardized sampling units that
accounted for variation in environmental conditions and equipment
configurations while treating each deployment as independent for
statistical analyses. This approach produced time-series images from
each deployment for estimating monarch cluster abundance through
systematic grid-based counting methods, enabling analysis of abundance
patterns in relation to wind speed and other environmental variables.

### Image Analysis

#### Grid-based Counting Method

To quantify changes in monarch butterfly abundance from collected
imagery, we developed a systematic grid-based counting protocol
balancing accuracy with the practical constraints of analyzing tens of
thousands of images. This approach addressed the challenge of estimating
abundance in large aggregations where individual counts would be
prohibitively time-consuming and emulated field researcher methods,
including those used in the annual Thanksgiving Count (Xerces Society
2017). We subdivided each image using a grid overlay system where human
labelers assigned order-of-magnitude estimates per cell. Grid dimensions
remained fixed throughout each deployment to ensure consistency. Custom
software developed using the Electron framework in JavaScript
facilitated this labeling effort.

Grid cell size varied by deployment based on camera-to-cluster distance.
Cell dimensions were optimized to ensure most occupied cells contained
butterflies in the 10--99 count range, balancing classification
efficiency with spatial resolution. This standardization minimized cells
alternating between widely different order-of-magnitude categories
across the time series.

#### Counting Protocol

Human labelers estimated butterfly abundance within each grid cell using
four order-of-magnitude categories: 0 (no butterflies), 1--9 (single
digits), 10--99 (dozens), and 100--999 (hundreds). Labelers trained
using a comprehensive online guide with example images and detailed
classification criteria
(<https://kylenessen.github.io/monarch_trailcam_classifier/>). The
protocol prioritized efficiency while maintaining consistency across
observers.

Because abundance estimates derived exclusively from two-dimensional
photographic images, our classification protocol quantified only
butterflies visible in the image plane without estimating
three-dimensional cluster structure or depth. This approach
intentionally excluded hidden individuals behind visible butterflies in
overlapping aggregations, providing a conservative but consistent
measure reflecting observable surface area rather than total volume. For
cells containing partial butterflies at grid boundaries, labelers
included these in counts unless double-counting would cause an adjacent
cell to move to a higher category. When butterfly counts fluctuated
between categories across the time series, we consistently applied the
lower estimate to maintain conservative abundance estimates.

In addition to estimating monarch abundance, labelers recorded whether
cells received direct sunlight. Direct sunlight classification presented
challenges because oversaturated conditions eliminated the contrast
enabling butterfly detection in shaded areas. Labelers classified cells
as receiving direct sunlight when branches or butterflies exhibited
additional illumination clearly from direct rather than indirect light,
even when individual butterflies became difficult to distinguish due to
pixel oversaturation. This classification required careful attention to
subtle shape recognition and contextual awareness about butterfly
locations established from previous images in the time series. This
measurement was recorded only for occupied cells and stored separately.

Labelers received ongoing feedback throughout the classification
process. All classifications underwent review for common errors
including mislabeled cells, incorrect category assignments, and
inconsistent counting criteria application. Direct communication of
corrections to labelers ensured consistent protocol application.

#### Abundance Calculation

We calculated an abundance index for each frame by summing the products
of cell counts and their assigned category values across all grid cells,
employing conservative estimates using minimum values within each
order-of-magnitude category:

$$\text{Abundance index} = \sum_{i}^{}\rho_{i} \times C_{i}$$

where $\rho_{i}$ represents the number of cells in category $i$, and
$C_{i}$ represents the conservative estimate for that category. We used
minimum category values ($C_{1} = 1$ for category 1--9, $C_{2} = 10$ for
category 10--99, and $C_{3} = 100$ for category 100--999) rather than
midpoint or maximum values to ensure temporal analyses reflected genuine
population shifts rather than estimation uncertainty.

### Temperature Data Extraction

Temperature represents a critical environmental variable influencing
monarch activity patterns and potentially confounding wind effects.
Ambient temperature data were extracted from trail camera images using
optical character recognition (OCR). Each camera displayed temperature
readings on the image overlay, but these values were not accessible
through EXIF metadata, necessitating visual extraction methods. We
developed an automated Python script utilizing OCR technology to extract
temperature values from approximately 56,000 images across all
deployments. The extraction process employed multiple preprocessing
strategies and pattern matching algorithms to accommodate variations in
image quality and display characteristics.

Following initial automated extraction, we manually reviewed and
corrected edge cases where OCR failed or produced anomalous values. All
temperature data underwent systematic quality control through
visualization of deployment-specific time series, enabling
identification and correction of erroneous values. This process ensured
complete temperature coverage for all analyzed images, providing the
ambient temperature covariate required for our statistical models.

### Statistical Analysis

#### Data Preparation

Statistical analysis employed a lag-based framework to capture the
temporal dynamics of butterfly responses to environmental changes,
comparing butterfly counts between consecutive 30-minute intervals.
Observation pairs were constructed by matching counts at time $t$ with
counts at time $t - 30$ minutes, applying a ±5 minute tolerance window
to accommodate minor temporal variations in image capture. The response
variable (change in butterfly abundance between time points) underwent
cube root transformation to achieve approximate normality while
preserving directional information:
$y = \text{sign}(\Delta) \times |\Delta|^{1/3}$, where $\Delta$
represents the difference in butterfly counts. While exploratory data
analysis revealed generally well-behaved distributions, we observed
bimodality in the raw butterfly abundance data driven primarily by a
single anomalous event at deployment SC8. At this deployment, a large
butterfly aggregation abruptly declined to near zero without
corresponding changes in the measured environmental variables (wind
speed, temperature, or solar exposure). This singular event was unlike
any other observation in the dataset. We retained this deployment in the
final analysis for two reasons: first, to maximize sample size and avoid
arbitrary data exclusion, and second, sensitivity analysis showed that
the cube root transformation of abundance differences adequately
addressed the distributional concerns, with model selection and
parameter estimates remaining consistent whether SC8 was included or
excluded. The transformation approach made the anomaly's inclusion or
exclusion immaterial to the final results. Observation pairs where both
time points recorded zero butterflies were excluded as uninformative,
reducing the dataset from approximately 2,500 potential pairs to 1,894
analyzable observations across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

#### Variable Selection

Predictor variables were selected to test specific hypotheses while
avoiding multicollinearity. Maximum wind gust speed during each
30-minute interval served as the primary wind metric, with alternative
wind measurements (average sustained speed, modal gust, gust standard
deviation) excluded due to high correlation ($r > 0.75$). Environmental
predictors included average temperature between observation pairs,
number of butterflies in direct sunlight at the previous time point, and
minutes elapsed since the first observation of each day to capture
diurnal patterns. Total butterfly count at the previous time point was
included as a control variable, enabling distinction between
proportional and absolute changes in abundance. When included, this
variable tests effects on proportional change; when excluded, models
test effects on absolute change.

#### Model Framework

Analysis employed generalized additive mixed models (GAMMs) implemented
through the mgcv package in R. Model selection followed an
information-theoretic approach, comparing 48 candidate models using
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The candidate set comprised two
fundamental frameworks: models including the lag abundance term (24
models) and models excluding it (24 models), with each framework
containing null models, single predictor models, additive combinations,
two- and three-way interactions, and models incorporating smooth terms
for non-linear relationships. Random effects structure accounted for
variation at three hierarchical levels: deployment location, observer,
and deployment-day. Temporal autocorrelation within days was addressed
using a first-order autoregressive (AR1) correlation structure grouped
by deployment-day. All models were fitted using restricted maximum
likelihood (REML) estimation.

To test specifically for threshold effects at the proposed 2 m/s
disruptive wind speed, we conducted a sensitivity analysis using an
alternative wind metric. We repeated the entire model selection process,
replacing maximum wind gust speed with a threshold-based predictor: the
count of minutes within each 30-minute observation period where wind
gusts equaled or exceeded 2 m/s. This variable ranged from 0 to 30
minutes and was tested using the same 48 model structures, allowing
direct comparison of continuous versus threshold-based wind effects.

#### Model Validation

Model assumptions were verified through standard residual diagnostics
including examination of residual distributions, fitted versus residual
plots, and quantile-quantile plots. Convergence was confirmed for all
candidate models in both the primary and sensitivity analyses. Model
performance and predictor significance were evaluated through AIC
comparison, with models differing by less than 2 AIC units considered
equivalent.

#### Statistical Power Analysis

To evaluate whether our study had adequate statistical power to detect
wind effects if present, we conducted a simulation-based power analysis.
This approach assessed our ability to detect various effect sizes given
our sample size of 1,894 paired observations. We simulated 200 datasets
from the best-fitting model (which excluded wind effects) and
artificially introduced wind effects of known magnitude ranging from
0.05 to 0.20 standard deviations of the response variable. For each
effect size, we refitted models including wind terms to determine the
proportion of simulations where the artificial effect was detected as
statistically significant ($\alpha = 0.05$). This simulation approach
accounts for the complexity of our GAMM framework and hierarchical data
structure, providing robust estimates of statistical power for detecting
wind effects across a range of biologically plausible magnitudes.

## Results

### Descriptive Statistics

Environmental conditions varied substantially across the 78-day
monitoring period at Spring Canyon and UDMH during the 2023-2024
overwintering season. The dataset comprised 1,894 observations collected
at 30-minute intervals during daylight hours (07:00--17:00) from
November 17, 2023, to February 4, 2024, totaling 947 observation hours
across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

Wind speeds ranged from complete calm to moderately strong conditions,
with maximum gusts reaching 12.4 m/s (mean = 2.2 ± 1.4 m/s, median = 2.2
m/s). The interquartile range of 1.3--3.0 m/s indicated that most
observations occurred under relatively mild wind conditions. Temperature
showed considerable variation throughout the monitoring period, ranging
from 3.0 to 30.0°C (mean = 14.6 ± 3.8°C, median = 14.0°C), with an
interquartile range of 12.5--17.0°C typical of California coastal winter
conditions. Direct solar exposure occurred in 31.7% of observations (n =
601), with butterflies actively basking when present in sunlight,
averaging 17.0 individuals in direct sun (range: 1--295).

Monarch abundance exhibited high variability across sites and time
periods. Butterfly counts ranged from 0 to 770 individuals per
observation, with a mean of 81.4 ± 100.0 butterflies and a median of 37
butterflies. The wide interquartile range (9--119 butterflies) reflected
substantial variation in cluster sizes. Zero-count observations,
representing either the beginning of cluster formation or cluster
dissolution, comprised 2.3% of the dataset (n = 43).

Cluster sizes varied markedly among the 10 deployment locations. Site
SC10 recorded the largest aggregation with 770 monarchs, while mean
abundances ranged from 0 at SC9 to 325.8 at UDMH2. Eight deployments
observed maximum cluster sizes exceeding 100 butterflies, with mean
maximum cluster size across sites reaching 315.6 individuals. This
variation in cluster sizes across deployments reflects the heterogeneous
distribution of monarchs across overwintering microhabitats within the
study sites.

The comprehensive temporal coverage, with observations at 30-minute
intervals capturing 16.5 observations per deployment-day on average,
provided fine-scale resolution of monarch behavioral responses to
changing environmental conditions. Peak observation activity occurred at
16:00 hours (196 observations), corresponding with afternoon warming
periods when monarchs typically exhibit increased movement.

### Summary of Data and Model Selection

Environmental factors, but not wind, drove monarch abundance changes in
1,894 paired observations from 115 monitoring periods at two
overwintering sites during the 2023-2024 season. Testing of 48 candidate
models identified M23 as the best-fit model.

Model M23 included smooth terms for previous butterfly count,
temperature, butterflies in direct sun, and time since sunrise,
achieving an AIC value of 8081.848 (Table [1.1](#tab:model_selection)).
M23 captured all the model weight across 48 candidates (AIC = 8081.8),
with the next best model ΔAIC = 4.8. Wind variables appeared in only one
of the top five models (M24), which included maximum wind speed but
performed substantially worse than M23 (ΔAIC = 6.2), with the wind
effect showing weak evidence of an association (p = 0.218).

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                 AIC        ΔAIC    Weight  Wind p
  ------- ------------------------------------- -------- ------ --------- -------
  M23     Previous butterfly count,             8081.8      0.0     1.000      NA
          Temperature,                                                    

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                           
          sunrise                                                         

  M22     Previous butterfly count, Temperature 8086.6      4.8   \<0.001      NA
          (linear),                                                       

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                           
          sunrise                                                         

  M24     Previous butterfly count, Maximum     8088.0      6.2   \<0.001   0.218
          wind speed,                                                     

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct                              
          sun, Time since sunrise                                         

  M47     Temperature, Butterflies in direct    8101.3     19.4   \<0.001      NA
          sun,                                                            

          Time since sunrise                                              

  M17     Previous butterfly count,             8105.9     24.0   \<0.001      NA
          Temperature,                                                    

          Butterflies in direct sun                                       
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:model_selection .anchor}Model selection results showing the
  top five candidate models from 48 tested, ranked by AIC. Model terms
  are shown with their respective AIC values, ΔAIC relative to the best
  model, and AIC weights calculated across all 48 models. Wind p-values
  are shown where applicable; NA indicates the model did not include
  wind variables.

### Analysis of the Best-Fit Model

The best-fit model (M23) explained 5.7% of variance in monarch abundance
changes (adjusted R² = 0.057). The model formula was:

$$\text{Change in abundance} \sim s(\text{Previous butterfly count}) + s(\text{Temperature}) + s(\text{Butterflies in direct sun}) + s(\text{Time since sunrise})$$

where $s()$ denotes smooth terms. All four smooth terms showed
significant effects on monarch abundance changes.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Term                              EDF   Ref. df    F-value      p-value
  ----------------------------- ------- --------- ---------- ------------
  Previous butterfly count         2.62      2.62      12.02     8.26e-07

  Temperature                      3.93      3.93       3.23        0.028

  Butterflies in direct sun        1.53      1.53      19.36     1.22e-05

  Time since sunrise               4.90      4.90       8.90      \<2e-16
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Summary of smooth terms in the best-fit model (M23). EDF represents
  effective degrees of freedom, indicating the complexity of each smooth
  relationship.

All four predictors in the best-fit model showed significant effects on
monarch abundance changes (Figure [1.1](#fig:partial_effects)). The
previous butterfly count exhibited a significant non-linear negative
relationship (EDF = 2.62, F = 12.02, p \< 0.001), with increasingly
negative changes as the previous count increased, indicating
proportionally greater departures from larger aggregations. Butterflies
in direct sun showed a strong negative effect on roost abundance (EDF =
1.53, F = 19.36, p \< 0.001), with greater numbers in direct sun
associated with larger decreases in total abundance.

Time since sunrise revealed a pronounced diurnal pattern (EDF = 4.90, F
= 8.90, p \< 0.001), with monarchs departing clusters throughout the
morning and reaching peak departures approximately 3.25 hours after
sunrise. Cluster reformation began in the afternoon, with most
butterflies returning around 8.25 hours after sunrise, capturing the
characteristic daily rhythm of monarch activity at overwintering sites.
Temperature exhibited a complex non-linear relationship (EDF = 3.93, F =
3.23, p = 0.028). Below the flight threshold (blue vertical band) of
12.7-16°C established by Masters et al. (1988), temperature had minimal
effect on cluster abundance. Above this threshold, clusters reformed as
temperatures increased up to 25°C, with peak reformation occurring
around 21°C. Beyond 25°C, the pattern reversed, with each additional
degree Celsius increasing departure rates from clusters.

[]{#fig:partial_effects
.anchor}![](media/image1.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="4.861111111111111in"}

Partial effects of the four significant predictors on monarch abundance
change in a 2x2 layout. The partial effect on monarch abundance as
estimated from the single attribute being compared to abundance while
assuming all other attribute values are held constant. Top row:
butterflies in direct sun (left) and previous butterfly count (right).
Bottom row: time since sunrise in minutes (left) and temperature in °C
(right). Solid lines show the estimated smooth functions with 95%
confidence intervals (shaded regions). All effects are shown on the same
scale for comparison.

### Evaluation of the Disruptive Wind Hypothesis

Our analysis provided no support for the three hierarchical wind
hypotheses:

First, wind did not act as a disruptive force to overwintering monarchs.
Among our 48 candidate models, wind appeared in only one of the top five
models (M24), where it showed little evidence of an effect (p = 0.218)
and resulted in substantially poorer model performance compared to the
best model (ΔAIC = 6.2). The partial effect of maximum wind speed from
this model remains flat with wide uncertainty across the observed range,
reinforcing the lack of a coherent signal
(Figure [1.2](#fig:m24_wind_partial_effect)).

[]{#fig:m24_wind_partial_effect
.anchor}![](media/image2.png){width="3.7916666666666665in"
height="3.1597222222222223in"}

Partial effect of maximum wind speed on monarch abundance change from
model M24. The flat relationship with wide confidence intervals
demonstrates no clear effect of wind on butterfly departures. The red
dashed line indicates the proposed 2 m/s disruptive threshold.

Second, we found no evidence for disruption above the proposed 2 m/s
threshold. A sensitivity analysis using a specific threshold predictor
('minutes with wind speed \> 2 m/s') confirmed this lack of a threshold
effect, as models with this variable performed poorly and did not rank
among the top candidates (Table [1.3](#tab:threshold_model_selection)).
Visually, the relationship between wind and monarch abundance change
remained flat across the 2 m/s boundary
(Figure [1.3](#fig:wind_scatter)). With mean maximum wind speeds of
2.2 m/s (SD = 1.4 m/s), conditions that should have revealed threshold
effects if present, no disruption occurred at or above this boundary.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                 AIC        $\Delta$AIC    Weight  Wind p
  ------- ------------------------------------- -------- ------------- --------- -------
  T24     Previous butterfly count, Minutes     8089.4             7.6     0.021   0.372
          above 2 m/s,                                                           

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct                                     
          sun, Time since sunrise                                                

  T44     Minutes above 2 m/s, Temperature,     8108.4            26.5   \<0.001   0.256

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                                  
          sunrise                                                                

  T21     Previous butterfly count, Minutes     8110.6            28.7   \<0.001   0.053
          above 2 m/s,                                                           

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct                                     
          sun                                                                    

  T43     Minutes above 2 m/s, Temperature      8115.5            33.7   \<0.001   0.275
          (linear),                                                              

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                                  
          sunrise                                                                

  T19     Previous butterfly count, Minutes     8119.8            37.9   \<0.001   0.078
          above 2 m/s,                                                           

          Temperature (linear), Butterflies in                                   
          direct sun                                                             
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:threshold_model_selection .anchor}Model selection results
  from sensitivity analysis using wind threshold predictor (minutes with
  wind speed \> 2 m/s). Poor model performance (high $\Delta$AIC values)
  demonstrates lack of support for the 2 m/s disruption threshold.

Third, wind's effects did not scale with intensity. The relationship
remained flat across all observed wind speeds (0--12 m/s), with
confidence intervals consistently encompassing zero
(Figure [1.3](#fig:wind_scatter)).

[]{#fig:wind_scatter
.anchor}![](media/image3.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="3.499998906386702in"}

Relationship between maximum wind speed (m/s) and monarch abundance
change. The red dashed line shows the proposed 2 m/s disruptive wind
threshold, while the flat trend line indicates no effect of wind on
butterfly departures. Points represent 30-minute observation periods.

### Statistical Power to Detect Wind Effects

Post-hoc power analysis confirmed our study had adequate statistical
power to detect biologically meaningful wind effects
(Table [1.4](#tab:power_analysis)). With 1,894 paired observations, we
achieved 87.5% power to detect moderate effect sizes (0.15 standard
deviations) and 98.5% power to detect larger effects (0.20 standard
deviations). Power for small effects (0.10 standard deviations) was 56%,
while very small effects (0.05 standard deviations) yielded only 16.5%
power. These results indicate that our failure to detect wind effects is
unlikely due to insufficient statistical power for effect sizes of
biological relevance.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             Effect Size (SD units)      Power (Proportion) Power (%)
  ------- ------------------------- ----------------------- -------------
  0.05                         0.05                   0.165 16.5%

  0.1                          0.10                   0.560 56%

  0.15                         0.15                   0.875 87.5%

  0.2                          0.20                   0.985 98.5%
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:power_analysis .anchor}Estimated power to detect wind
  effects of varying magnitudes. Effect sizes are expressed in standard
  deviations of the response variable (cube root transformed change in
  butterfly abundance).

### Model Diagnostics

Model residuals showed distinct linear banding patterns consistent with
the discrete counting method used to estimate butterfly abundance, while
the Q-Q plot indicated approximately normal residual distribution with
minor tail deviations (Figure [1.4](#fig:diagnostics)).

[]{#fig:diagnostics
.anchor}![](media/image4.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.9166666666666665in"}

Model diagnostics for M23. Left: Residuals versus fitted values showing
banding that reflects the discrete counting method, with smoothed
relationship shown in blue. Right: Normal Q-Q plot of model residuals
showing reasonable normality with minor tail deviations.

## Discussion

### Wind Does Not Disrupt Overwintering Monarch Butterflies

Our study provides the first direct empirical test of the disruptive
wind hypothesis and finds no support for wind as a primary factor
influencing monarch butterfly clustering behavior. Despite the
widespread adoption of the 2 m/s wind threshold in conservation practice
(Xerces Society 2016), our data reveal no relationship between wind
speed and butterfly departures across the full range of observed
conditions (0--12 m/s). While our models explain only 5.7% of variance
in butterfly movements, reflecting our focus on testing wind effects
rather than comprehensively explaining movement patterns, they had
sufficient statistical power to detect environmental signals. This
finding challenges assumptions underlying three decades of management
guidance.

The absence of wind effects in our data is particularly striking given
that observed mean maximum wind speeds (2.2 m/s, SD = 1.4) frequently
exceeded the proposed threshold. If the disruptive wind hypothesis were
valid, we should have observed a clear signal: substantial reductions in
butterfly abundance, as predicted by the disruptive wind hypothesis.
Instead, we observed no change, small changes, or even positive changes
in butterfly abundance at wind speeds six times the proposed disruption
threshold.

Importantly, our power analysis demonstrated 87.5% power to detect
moderate effect sizes (0.15 standard deviations) and 98.5% power for
larger effects (0.20 standard deviations), while wind appeared in only
one of the top five models (M24). In that model wind showed little
evidence of an effect (p = 0.218) and resulted in substantially poorer
model performance compared to the best model (ΔAIC = 6.2, capturing only
4% of model weight). This weak wind signal, combined with our high
statistical power, allows us to rule out all but very small wind
effects. Given that the disruptive wind hypothesis predicts conspicious
reduction in abundance above threshold wind speeds, a substantial effect
by any measure, our failure to detect such patterns provides strong
evidence against the hypothesis rather than merely absence of evidence.

The methodological validity of our approach is confirmed by the strong
signals detected for other environmental variables. Had our counting
method or analytical framework been flawed, we would not have captured
the pronounced effects of direct sunlight (F = 19.36, p \< 0.001) or the
complex diurnal patterns (F = 8.90, p \< 0.001) that emerged from the
same dataset.

### Alternative Drivers of Monarch Movement

While our study was designed specifically to test the wind hypothesis,
our results suggest that thermoregulation, light exposure, and diurnal
rhythms play more important roles than wind in driving short-term
movements at overwintering sites.

#### Direct Sunlight as the Strongest Predictor

Direct sunlight exposure emerged as the strongest environmental
predictor of reductions in cluster abundance in our study (F = 19.36, p
\< 0.001). Butterflies exposed to direct sunlight at the beginning of an
observation interval showed the largest decreases in abundance,
suggesting that solar radiation rapidly increases butterfly body
temperatures well above ambient conditions. This finding aligns with
Masters, Malcolm, and Brower (1988)'s work showing that monarchs in
direct sunlight can elevate their body temperature above ambient
conditions within minutes. This rapid warming capability could readily
explain why direct sunlight exposure is such a strong predictor of
decreased abundance at clusters.

The relationship between sunlight and departure represents a key
component of the thermoregulatory equation. Monarchs have evolved to
efficiently absorb solar radiation, an adaptation that enables flight at
temperatures below what would otherwise be physiologically possible
(Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988). Yet this same efficiency becomes a
liability when clustering. Butterflies cannot avoid absorbing heat when
exposed to direct sun, risking overheating and accelerated depletion of
their finite lipid reserves through elevated metabolism (Masters,
Malcolm, and Brower 1988). This forces them to abandon energetically
favorable clustering positions even when ambient temperatures remain
cool. This trade-off between the benefits of clustering and the thermal
constraints imposed by solar exposure may fundamentally shape daily
movement patterns at overwintering sites.

#### Temperature Effects and Their Interpretation

Ambient temperature showed a subtle but significant relationship with
monarch abundance changes (EDF = 3.93, F = 3.23, p = 0.028). The data
suggest minimal change below 15°C (the known flight threshold), a slight
positive association around 20--21°C, and sharp declines above 25°C
consistent with thermoregulatory constraints. Given that available
temperatures vary latitudinally across overwintering sites (Saniee and
Villablanca 2022), our results from Spring Canyon capture only a portion
of the temperature continuum experienced across the entire overwintering
range. The temperature effects we observed reflect responses within the
specific thermal envelope available at our study latitude. Testing these
patterns at sites spanning the full latitudinal gradient would reveal
whether monarch responses to temperature are consistent or vary with
local thermal regimes.

#### Diurnal Activity Patterns

Time since sunrise revealed distinct diurnal patterns (EDF = 4.90, F =
8.90, p \< 0.001), with butterflies departing clusters in the morning
and reforming aggregations in the afternoon. This pattern persists even
after controlling for temperature and sunlight, aligning with anecdotal
observations from overwintering sites throughout California.

### Study Limitations

Several limitations warrant consideration. Our data derive from a single
season (2023--2024) with typical monarch abundance at two sites. The
following season (2024--2025), virtually no clustering monarchs were
observed at Vandenberg Space Force Base (23 individuals total) despite
monitoring 10 sites. This coincided with the second-lowest overwintering
population on record statewide (Xerces Society 2025b), preventing
temporal replication of our study. Additionally, our counting
methodology introduced discretization artifacts that contributed to
large confidence intervals for environmental predictors. While we
detected strong signals like direct sunlight effects, more subtle
relationships require careful interpretation.

Furthermore, our study observed clusters where butterflies maintained
direct substrate contact. In historically massive aggregations
containing hundreds of thousands of individuals, many butterflies attach
only to other butterflies, creating multi-layered formations. If
substrate attachment confers greater wind resistance than
butterfly-to-butterfly attachment, the disruptive wind hypothesis might
apply specifically to these larger aggregations. Future work should
examine whether wind responses differ between substrate-attached and
butterfly-attached individuals, particularly at sites supporting extreme
densities.

### Management Implications

Our findings suggest that management strategies prioritizing wind
protection warrant reconsideration. The absence of wind effects despite
frequent threshold exceedances indicates that usable habitat within
existing groves may be larger than currently recognized. Areas
previously dismissed due to perceived wind exposure may provide suitable
conditions because they offer appropriate light and thermal regimes.

While past management efforts aimed at wind protection may have been
based on incomplete understanding, they likely produced beneficial
outcomes by increasing tree density. The fundamental recommendation to
plant and maintain trees remains sound. Management should prioritize
maintaining existing mature trees while establishing future roosting
habitat at densities that support healthy, long-lived growth. In
addition, as suggested by Saniee and Villablanca (2022), it may become
relevant to explore ways in which to manage for thermal attributes,
specifically sunlight.

### Future Research Directions

Our findings open several important avenues for future research. First,
explicit testing of light patterns as predictors of clustering locations
could establish whether canopy structure guides habitat selection. The
strong effect of direct sunlight (F = 19.36, p \< 0.001) combined with
the predictability of canopy-created light patterns suggests this may be
a primary factor in roost site selection. Previous research also
suggests light conditions may play an important role in habitat
selection. (Weiss et al. 1991) used hemispherical photography to measure
the Indirect Site Factor (ISF), which quantifies percent canopy
openness, across sites with different occupancy histories. Permanent
overwintering sites clustered within a narrow range of canopy openness
(approximately 20%) with relatively low variance, while transient and
unoccupied sites showed progressively greater variability (Figure
[1.5](#fig:weiss_canopy)). This pattern of consistent light conditions
at successful sites provides additional context for understanding how
canopy structure might influence clustering behavior.

[]{#fig:weiss_canopy
.anchor}![](media/image5.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="2.752923228346457in"}

Percent canopy openness (Indirect Site Factor) by occupancy status,
adapted from Weiss et al. (1991). Permanent overwintering sites exhibit
both a specific range of canopy openness ( 20%) and lower variance
compared to transient and unoccupied/former sites.

Second, investigation of social dynamics and positive behavioral
feedback mechanisms could address unexplained variation in our models.
Monarchs may exhibit emergent clustering behaviors where initial
settlement increases the probability of others joining, creating
self-reinforcing patterns independent of environmental conditions.

Research should also examine whether our findings extend across the
broader overwintering range. Testing these patterns at sites with
different tree species, latitudes, and in particular population
densities would strengthen conclusions about the generality of wind
effects, or their absence.

### Conclusions

Wind did not disrupt monarch clusters even at speeds far exceeding
presumptive thresholds. Instead, butterflies responded primarily to
thermal conditions, including light exposure and ambient temperature,
and to diurnal rhythms. These findings challenge current assumptions
about overwintering habitat requirements and suggest that management
priorities should be reevaluated. While our study represents one season
at two sites, the absence of wind effects despite adequate statistical
power raises important questions regarding decades of conservation
guidelines. As monarch populations face continued threats,
evidence-based management becomes increasingly critical for conserving
the overwintering sites essential for this iconic species.

## References

Baudier, Kaitlin M., Catherine L. D'Amelio, Rumaan Malhotra, Michael P.
O'Connor, and Sean O'Donnell. 2018. "Extreme Insolation: Climatic
Variation Shapes the Evolution of Thermal Tolerance at Multiple Scales."
*The American Naturalist* 192 (3): 347--59.
<https://doi.org/10.1086/698656>.

Bell, William J., and Ernst Kramer. 1979. "Search and Anemotactic
Orientation of Cockroaches." *Journal of Insect Physiology* 25 (8):
631--40. <https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1910(79)90112-4>.

Blois-Heulin, Catherine, Philip H. Crowley, Margarett Arrington, and Dan
M. Johnson. 1990. "Direct and Indirect Effects of Predators on the
Dominant Invertebrates of Two Freshwater Littoral Communities."
*Oecologia* 84 (3): 295--306. <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00329753>.

Bonte, D., and L. Lens. 2007. "Heritability of Spider Ballooning
Motivation Under Different Wind Velocities." *Evolutionary Ecology
Research*.
<https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Heritability-of-spider-ballooning-motivation-under-Bonte-Lens/d6118c2cd143572bc4f098b5916186ec63c0f12a>.

Carvallo, Fernando R., Bradley A. Strickland, Sean K. Kinard, Brandi
Kiel Reese, James Derek Hogan, and Christopher J. Patrick. 2022.
"Structure and Functional Composition of Macroinvertebrate Communities
in Coastal Plain Streams Across a Precipitation Gradient." *Freshwater
Biology* 67 (10): 1725--38. <https://doi.org/10.1111/fwb.13968>.

Chapperon, Coraline, Nils Volkenborn, Jacques Clavier, Sarah Séité, Rui
Seabra, and Fernando P. Lima. 2016. "Exposure to Solar Radiation Drives
Organismal Vulnerability to Climate: Evidence from an Intertidal
Limpet." *Journal of Thermal Biology* 57 (April): 92--100.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtherbio.2016.03.002>.

Chown, Steven L., Jesper G. Sørensen, and John S. Terblanche. 2011.
"Water Loss in Insects: An Environmental Change Perspective." *Journal
of Insect Physiology*, \"Cold and Desiccation Tolerance\" honoring Karl
Erik Zachariassen, 57 (8): 1070--84.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinsphys.2011.05.004>.

Everatt, Matthew J., Pete Convey, Jeffrey S. Bale, M. Roger Worland, and
Scott A. L. Hayward. 2015. "Responses of Invertebrates to Temperature
and Water Stress: A Polar Perspective." *Journal of Thermal Biology*,
What sets the limit? How thermal limits, performance and preference in
ectotherms are influenced by water or energy balance, 54 (December):
118--32. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtherbio.2014.05.004>.

Fisher, Ashley, Kiana Saniee, Charis Van der Heide, Jessica Griffiths,
Daniel Meade, and Francis Villablanca. 2018. "Climatic Niche Model for
Overwintering Monarch Butterflies in a Topographically Complex Region of
California." *Insects* 9 (4): 167.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/insects9040167>.

Gosselin, Louis A., and Lisa A. Jones. 2010. "Effects of Solar Radiation
on Barnacle Settlement, Early Post-Settlement Mortality and Community
Development in the Intertidal Zone." *Marine Ecology Progress Series*
407 (May): 149--58. <https://doi.org/10.3354/meps08567>.

HOEGH-GULDBERG, OVE, and JOHN S. PEARSE. 1995. "Temperature, Food
Availability, and the Development of Marine Invertebrate Larvae1."
*American Zoologist* 35 (4): 415--25.
<https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/35.4.415>.

Holmstrup, Martin, Mark Bayley, and Hans Ramløv. 2002. "Supercool or
Dehydrate? An Experimental Analysis of Overwintering Strategies in Small
Permeable Arctic Invertebrates." *Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences* 99 (8): 5716--20. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.082580699>.

Hristov, Nickolay I., Dionysios Nikolaidis, Tatjana Y. Hubel, and Louise
C. Allen. 2019. "Estimating Overwintering Monarch Butterfly Populations
Using Terrestrial LiDAR Scanning." *Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution*
7. <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2019.00266>.

Lafferty, Kevin D., and Jenny C. Shaw. 2013. "Comparing Mechanisms of
Host Manipulation Across Host and Parasite Taxa." *Journal of
Experimental Biology* 216 (1): 56--66.
<https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.073668>.

Leonard, Ryan J, Clare McArthur, and Dieter F Hochuli. 2016. "Exposure
to Wind Alters Insect Herbivore Behaviour in Larvae of Uraba Lugens
(Lepidoptera: Nolidae)." *Austral Entomology* 55 (3): 242--46.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/aen.12175>.

Leong, Kingston L H. 2016. "Evaluation and Management of California
Monarch Winter Sites."

Leong, Kingston. L. H. 1990. "Microenvironmental Factors Associated with
the Winter Habitat of the Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Danaidae) in
Central California." *Annals of the Entomological Society of America* 83
(5): 906--10. <https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/83.5.906>.

Mammola, Stefano, and Marco Isaia. 2018. "Day--Night and Seasonal
Variations of a Subterranean Invertebrate Community in the Twilight
Zone." *Subterranean Biology* 27 (September): 31--51.
<https://doi.org/10.3897/subtbiol.27.28909>.

Masters, Alan R., Stephen B. Malcolm, and Lincoln P. Brower. 1988.
"Monarch Butterfly (Danaus Plexippus) Thermoregulatory Behavior and
Adaptations for Overwintering in Mexico." *Ecology* 69 (2): 458--67.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1940444>.

Miller-ter Kuile, Ana, Austen Apigo, An Bui, Bartholomew DiFiore,
Elizabeth S. Forbes, Michelle Lee, Devyn Orr, et al. 2022.
"Predator--Prey Interactions of Terrestrial Invertebrates Are Determined
by Predator Body Size and Species Identity." *Ecology* 103 (5): e3634.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.3634>.

Nathan, Ran, Nir Sapir, Ana Trakhtenbrot, Gabriel G. Katul, Gil Bohrer,
Martin Otte, Roni Avissar, et al. 2005. "Long-Distance Biological
Transport Processes Through the Air: Can Nature's Complexity Be Unfolded
in Silico?" *Diversity and Distributions* 11 (2): 131--37.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1366-9516.2005.00146.x>.

Pelton, Emma M., Cheryl B. Schultz, Sarina J. Jepsen, Scott Hoffman
Black, and Elizabeth E. Crone. 2019. "Western Monarch Population
Plummets: Status, Probable Causes, and Recommended Conservation
Actions." *Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution* 7.
<https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2019.00258>.

Saigusa, Masayuki. 2001. "Daily Rhythms of Emergence of Small
Invertebrates Inhabiting Shallow Subtidal Zones: A Comparative
Investigation at Four Locations in Japan." *Ecological Research* 16 (1):
1--28. <https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1703.2001.00367.x>.

Saniee, Kiana, and Francis Villablanca. 2022. "Hierarchy and Scale
Influence the Western Monarch Butterfly Overwintering Microclimate."
*Frontiers in Conservation Science* 3.
<https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcosc.2022.844299>.

Schultz, Cheryl B., Leone M. Brown, Emma Pelton, and Elizabeth E. Crone.
2017. "Citizen Science Monitoring Demonstrates Dramatic Declines of
Monarch Butterflies in Western North America." *Biological Conservation*
214 (October): 343--46. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2017.08.019>.

Schweizer, Mona, Rita Triebskorn, and Heinz-R. Köhler. 2019. "Snails in
the Sun: Strategies of Terrestrial Gastropods to Cope with Hot and Dry
Conditions." *Ecology and Evolution* 9 (22): 12940--60.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.5607>.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2024. "Endangered and Threatened
Wildlife and Plants; Threatened Species Status With Section 4(d) Rule
for Monarch Butterfly and Designation of Critical Habitat." Federal
Register. December 12, 2024.
<https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/12/12/2024-28855/endangered-and-threatened-wildlife-and-plants-threatened-species-status-with-section-4d-rule-for>.

Weiss, Stuart B., Paul M. Rich, Dennis D. Murphy, William H. Calvert,
and Paul R. Ehrlich. 1991. "Forest Canopy Structure at Overwintering
Monarch Butterfly Sites: Measurements with Hemispherical Photography."
*Conservation Biology* 5 (2): 165--75.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.1991.tb00121.x>.

Xerces Society. 2016. "State of the Monarch Overwintering Sites in
California." 16-015_01. Portland, OR: The Xerces Society for
Invertebrate Conservation.
<https://www.xerces.org/sites/default/files/2018-05/16-015_01_XercesSoc_State-of-Monarch-Overwintering-Sites-in-California_web.pdf>.

---------. 2017. "Step-by-Step Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count
Monitoring Guide."

---------. 2025a. "Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count and New Year's
Count Data, 1997-2025."
[WesternMonarchCount.com](https://WesternMonarchCount.com).

---------. 2025b. "Western Monarch Butterfly Population Declines to Near
Record Low." March 6, 2025.
<https://www.xerces.org/press/western-monarch-butterfly-population-declines-to-near-record-low>.
