# Introduction

[This is a great opening sentence. Make it a paragraph. The idea in
writing this introduction is not to just make statements, but to make
their truth evident. The best way to do that is to provide examples with
their citations. Multiple and diverse examples will provide the reader
with what seems like a lot of evidence. In other words make a
case.]{.comment-start id="1429434505" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T06:57:06"}The []{.comment-end
id="1429434505"}distribution and survival of invertebrate species are
governed by a complex interplay of biotic and abiotic factors. For many
insects, abiotic conditions such as temperature, humidity, and wind can
be primary drivers of behavior, physiology, and habitat
selection.[]{.paragraph-insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T13:52:30.198Z"}

[Same comment. Make this a paragraph. Explain, don\'t just state, how
important wind can be.]{.comment-start id="528246854"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T06:58:05"}Wind[]{.comment-end id="528246854"}, in
particular, can influence everything from dispersal and migration to
foraging efficiency and predation risk, acting as both a facilitator and
a significant environmental stressor.[]{.paragraph-insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T13:57:19.249Z"}

The monarch butterfly (*Danaus plexippus*) presents an exceptional
system for studying the[se dynamics]{.deletion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:01:29.948Z"}
[]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:01:40.838Z"}[Referring back to the opening sentence
will focus the topic.]{.comment-start id="2139242596"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:02:26"}[complex
interplay]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:01:40.838Z"} []{.comment-end id="2139242596"}[and
wind in particular]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:01:40.838Z"}, as its complex life history exposes it
to a [This is the last sentence of the third paragraph. In this
paragraph you review the \"unique suite of environmental challenges
across distinct seasonal phases.\" That review makes it so we agree with
this last sentence when we read it. Â \"Oh, yeah, this would be a great
test case\" is what you want the reader to think.]{.comment-start
id="328089451" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:00:20"}unique suite of environmental challenges
across distinct seasonal phases.[]{.comment-end id="328089451"}

As a charismatic and threatened species, understanding the factors that
limit monarch populations is critical for effective conservation.
Western monarch populations have declined by more than 95% from their
historic highs, prompting the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to propose
listing the monarch as a threatened species with designated critical
habitat in California (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2024). A primary
threat identified in this listing is the degradation of [These should
have been identified in the previous paragraph along with other aspects
of the complex like history. The reader should be able to recognize that
you were focusing on one part of the life history.]{.comment-start
id="1054321398" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:04:03"}overwintering sites []{.comment-end
id="1054321398"}in California, a [Research suggests this to be the case,
but the research is not yet conclusive. This could indeed be the case,
but there might be a more significant bottleneck that occurs in another
part of the lifecycle.]{.comment-start id="1293840181"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:05:16"}[proposed]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:04:19.513Z"}
[]{.comment-end id="1293840181"}critical bottleneck in the monarch life
cycle where dense aggregations must survive for months on [Same comment.
Should be explained in the previous paragraph on complex life
history.]{.comment-start id="1729137365" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:06:12"}fixed energy reserves[]{.comment-end
id="1729137365"} while exposed to [same comment]{.comment-start
id="826379378" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:06:38"}environmental stressors[]{.comment-end
id="826379378"}.

For decades, management of these crucial sites has been guided by the
"microclimate hypothesis," which suggests that monarchs select groves
providing a specific suite of abiotic conditions: mild temperatures,
high humidity, dappled sunlight for thermoregulation, and critically,
shelter from wind (Kingston L. H. Leong 1990). [This statement is a bit
misleading. The micro climate hypothesis has indeed been proposed. The
misleading part is that it doesn\'t really stand anymore. Kiana\'s work
indicates that there isn\'t a single microclimate. Instead, the
available, and occupied micro climate varies with latitude. Ashley\'s
work indicates that the response to temperature is more complex than
previously thought. Low and freezing temperatures are avoided during the
overwintering season, but the warmest of the cold temperatures are found
at overwintering sites.\
One way to think about it, and a possible way to present it, is that the
micro climate hypothesis has gradually been rejected. One entire aspect
of the hypothesis has not even been tested, and that is the disruptive
wind hypothesis. If you do present it this way, then, in the discussion,
you will dismantle the micro climate hypothesis. This will set you up to
propose a more physiological or energetic hypothesis instead. Honestly,
that approach seems quite powerful.\
This paragraph, more than any other, needs to be rewritten. It is
probably two paragraphs one about the micro climate hypothesis, and the
other about the disruptive wind hypothesis.]{.comment-start
id="1557657683" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:15:18"}Among []{.comment-end id="1557657683"}these
factors, wind has been identified as a key determinant of habitat
suitability. Influential work by Leong proposed the "disruptive wind
hypothesis," which asserts that winds exceeding a threshold of 2 m/s
physically dislodge butterflies from their clusters or trigger
energetically costly escape responses (Kingston L. H. Leong 2016).

[Make this evident. Meaning, this statement needs to be
supported.]{.comment-start id="919945158"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:17:15"}This
[]{.comment-end id="919945158"}2 m/s threshold has become a widely used
guideline in conservation planning in monarch conservation, directly
informing management guidelines adopted by federal and state agencies
and shaping restoration plans affecting millions of conservation
dollars. Yet despite its widespread influence, the disruptive wind
hypothesis is not a tested hypothesis but rather an inference resting on
indirect, correlational evidence. Leong's original conclusions were
derived from [comparing]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:18:58.842Z"} [observ]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:18:59.965Z"}[ations
of]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:19:04.004Z"} wind measurements between occupied and
unoccupied trees---an observational approach that cannot establish
causation or demonstrate actual butterfly responses to wind exposure.
[This type of \"initial observation\" is typically used to identify
plausible hypothesis,]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:21:36.046Z"} [but]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:22:46.786Z"} [not to
come to a conclusion or inference without further testing]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:21:36.046Z"}[Make a
statement here about why a direct test, which address confounding
variables, should have been conducted. The point would be to call out
confounding variables. That will make the necessity for hypothesis
testing more obvious to the reader.]{.comment-start id="2070759302"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:31:42"}[.]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:21:36.046Z"}
[]{.comment-end id="2070759302"}To date, no study has empirically
[documented]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:23:02.679Z"} [tested]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:23:04.383Z"} whether
monarchs abandon roosts when winds exceed this threshold, if such
abandonment is temporary or permanent, or if the presumed energetic
costs actually occur. This analytical gap is remarkable given the
hypothesis's foundational role in current conservation practice.

[A]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:23:28.032Z"}[In addition, a]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:23:31.825Z"} direct
test of this hypothesis requires isolating wind's effects from
confounding environmental drivers. As ectotherms, [This is a really key
part of your argument, and needs to be well supported by
references.]{.comment-start id="1037117555"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:25:30"}monarchs
depend on solar radiation and ambient temperature[]{.comment-end
id="1037117555"} to reach the [this should already have been introduced
in the complex life history paragraphs]{.comment-start id="550039202"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:24:30"}thermal
threshold required for flight[]{.comment-end id="550039202"}, and these
factors can trigger departures for foraging or water-seeking independent
of wind[Add something about thermoregulation and avoidance of high
temperature.]{.comment-start id="875614351"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:26:29"}.[]{.comment-end id="875614351"} Furthermore,
[This concept, including consistency and gustiness, needs to be
introduced in the paragraph where you discussed the importance of wind
to invertebrates. At this point, you want the reader to agree with you.
Do you want them to recognize that if Leong only looked at wind speed,
then the observational approach should be regarded as to simplistic. It
is also too simplistic because it did not consider confounding
variables.]{.comment-start id="28656119" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:29:51"}wind itself is
multidimensional[]{.comment-end id="28656119"}; its potential for
disruption may depend not only on average speed but also on its
consistency and gustiness. A meaningful test must therefore examine how
different wind characteristics influence monarch behavior while
controlling for these thermal conditions [as confounding
variables]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:32:09.161Z"}.

To our knowledge, this study provides the first direct, empirical test
of whether wind disrupts overwintering monarch butterflies. Using
continuous time-series observations of butterfly [This makes it sound
like you looked at the abundance of clusters. Restate so that it is the
abundance of butterflies in clusters.\
Maybe use this phrase \"butterfly abundance at overwintering clusters.\"
Somewhere in this area at a sentence that \"butterfly abundance at
overwintering clusters\" will be referred to as \"monarch abundance\"
throughout the remainder of the text. Then, from here, I\'ll use this as
the title for the response variable. Using the same title throughout,
will maintain a focus.]{.comment-start id="1128742760"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:32:57"}cluster
abundance[]{.comment-end id="1128742760"} paired with simultaneous,
on-site monitoring of wind, temperature, and solar radiation, we can
finally evaluate whether the foundational assumption underlying current
management practices is valid. We tested the disruptive wind hypothesis
through a series of hierarchical analyses.

First, we hypothesized that wind, alongside other environmental [Add
parentheses and state what the factors are. No need to get elaborate at
this point, but they should be listed.]{.comment-start id="1354554576"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:36:14"}factors[]{.comment-end id="1354554576"},
predicts butterfly abundance at overwintering clusters. If true, we
predict that an information-theoretic approach will identify wind as a
significant predictor of abundance changes, with monarch abundance
decreasing when exposed to higher wind speeds.

Second, we hypothesized that wind becomes disruptive above a specific
threshold of 2 m/s. If this threshold represents a meaningful biological
boundary, we predict that monarch abundance will decline at roosts
experiencing winds exceeding 2 m/s.

Third, we hypothesized that wind's disruptive effects scale with
intensity. If disruption increases with wind speed, we predict
proportionally greater decreases in monarch abundance as wind speeds
rise above the threshold[This is a really solid ending to the
introduction. Well done.]{.comment-start id="976420919"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:40:42"}.[]{.comment-end id="976420919"}

## Materials and Methods

### Study Site

Site selection followed a systematic filtering process driven by project
requirements and practical constraints. The study was supported by a
federal grant that mandated research be conducted on federal lands. We
selected Vandenberg Space Force Base (VSFB, 34.7398Â°N, 120.5725Â°W) in
Santa Barbara County, California, based on several key advantages: mild
winters with infrequent frost events, extensive historical plantings of
blue gum eucalyptus (*Eucalyptus globulus*) that have created suitable
overwintering habitat throughout the installation, and restricted access
that provided security for long-term equipment deployment. The base
contains thirty documented monarch overwintering groves, with several
sites consistently ranking within the top 10% of population counts
statewide over the past decade (Xerces Society 2025a).

Working with the base's monarch conservation coordinator, we initially
screened twelve locations from the thirty sites based on their
documented capacity to support monarch aggregations and provide
year-round access. This collaboration leveraged local expertise from
managing Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count activities for multiple
years (Xerces Society 2025a). During the study period, ten of these
sites were actively monitored. However, due to low monarch populations
during the 2023-2024 season and no observed overwintering behavior in
the 2024-2025 season, only two sites (Spring Canyon and UDMH) produced
measurable butterfly clusters suitable for our analysis.

Spring Canyon (34.6315Â°N, 120.6182Â°W) represents the most productive and
historically reliable overwintering site on VSFB. Located in South Base
within 300 meters of Space Launch Complex 4, this approximately
2.0-hectare site consists entirely of mature blue gum eucalyptus trees
reaching heights of approximately 40 meters. An unnamed perennial creek
runs through the center of the grove, creating a riparian corridor that
supports heterogeneous canopy structure with variable tree spacing and
diverse understory vegetation. Surf Road, an infrequently used paved
access road, bisects both the perennial creek and forest canopy.

The UDMH site (34.6719Â°N, 120.5950Â°W), also located in South Base,
comprises a 5.1-hectare eucalyptus grove planted in windrows adjacent to
a waste treatment facility. The uniformly spaced trees maintain a
largely clear understory with scattered low shrubs. Although only
recently documented as an overwintering location in 2022, UDMH
immediately emerged as a significant site, supporting over 6,000
monarchs during its initial count and ranking among the base's highest
population sites.

### Monitoring Strategy

Equipment deployment strategies differed between monitoring seasons to
accommodate research objectives and field experience. During the
2023-2024 season, we employed two strategies: targeted deployments at
sites with confirmed monarch presence, and anticipatory deployments at
locations where monarchs were expected based on historical data but not
currently observed. Targeted deployments concentrated at Spring Canyon
and UDMH where active aggregations were documented throughout the
season. Anticipatory deployments occurred at four overwintering sites:
additional locations within Spring Canyon and UDMH, plus SLC-6 and
Tangair. No monarchs were recorded at anticipatory deployment sites;
consequently, these data are excluded from analysis.

Building on insights from the initial season, for the 2024-2025 season
we modified our approach to establish monitoring stations at ten sites
before monarch arrival, based on historical occurrence records compiled
by the base conservation coordinator. This expanded spatial coverage
aimed to capture greater environmental variation across potential
overwintering sites. However, the 2024-2025 season coincided with
historically low monarch abundance throughout California (Xerces Society
2025b), resulting in no observed clustering behavior at any monitored
location on base. Consequently, our final dataset comprises two sites
(Spring Canyon and UDMH) from the 2023-2024 season only.

### Field Equipment

To observe changes in monarch abundance in response to strong wind
events, we deployed remote monitoring equipment near butterfly clusters
at overwintering sites. Field observations utilized 15-meter telescoping
fiberglass poles (Max-Gain Systems, Inc., Marietta, GA) anchored at
three points using ground anchors with guy lines securing both the top
and base to create stable, freestanding structures.

Poles were positioned 4-17 meters from cluster locations. This range,
determined through field testing, balanced image resolution requirements
for our grid-based counting method against disturbance minimization.
Closer positioning compromised field of view, while greater distances
degraded butterfly visibility below classification thresholds. Pole
placement considered ground stability for the 15-meter structures,
infrastructure clearance requirements, and clear viewing angles. When
deploying near active clusters, we approached from directions that
minimized disturbance; no butterfly dispersal was observed during
equipment deployment.

We monitored monarch abundance using modified trail cameras (GardePro E7
and E8, Shenzhen, China) configured for near-infrared imaging to enhance
contrast between clustering butterflies and surrounding vegetation.
Trail cameras were selected for their durability in extended field
deployment, native time-lapse functionality, and modification potential.
Near-infrared wavelength selection followed previous literature
demonstrating effectiveness for butterfly population estimation (Hristov
et al. 2019).

Hardware modifications exploited the camera's internal filter-switching
mechanism by engaging nighttime mode to access the clear glass filter
position, then disconnecting power to prevent reversion to the infrared
cut filter. Near-infrared pass filters (\>850 nm) were mounted
externally to restrict incoming light to NIR wavelengths. This
configuration produced images where clustering butterflies appeared as
dark masses against bright eucalyptus foliage reflectance in the
near-infrared spectrum. Field validation confirmed sufficient contrast
for visual distinction of monarch clusters from background vegetation,
supporting our human-labeler analytical approach.

Cameras were mounted atop poles using lightweight tie-down straps and
positioned horizontally toward butterfly clusters at roosting height.
The wireless live view feature enabled real-time preview and precise
camera aiming during deployment. Cameras operated in time-lapse mode
with motion detection disabled.

Sampling interval selection balanced temporal resolution, battery life,
and data processing feasibility through empirical optimization and
rigorous statistical validation. Initial deployments used 10-minute
intervals to capture significant changes in butterfly abundance, which
preliminary observations indicated occurred on hourly rather than minute
scales, while maintaining approximately 6-week continuous operation.
Post-deployment statistical analysis using mixed-effects models and
information-theoretic approaches systematically compared multiple
sampling intervals across deployments. We conducted sequential subsample
analyses starting with full temporal resolution and progressively
testing reduced frequencies. Information-theoretic model comparison
using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) demonstrated that 30-minute
intervals provided optimal balance, losing less than 5% of information
compared to full temporal resolution (measured by root mean square
error) while reducing image classification workload by 67%. Variance
comparison analysis and visual assessment of fitted trend lines
confirmed that this interval preserved essential time-series patterns
including diurnal activity cycles, weather-response dynamics, and
multi-day population trends. Battery life constraints and field
deployment logistics further supported this interval choice, enabling
extended autonomous operation essential for capturing complete
behavioral sequences during variable weather conditions.

To quantify the wind conditions hypothesized to influence butterfly
behavior, wind monitoring equipment consisted of Rain Wise WindLog Wind
Data Loggers (Rain Wise Inc., Trenton, Maine) installed at pole apices
to measure wind at heights approximating butterfly roosting locations.
These instruments recorded average wind speed and maximum wind gust at
one-minute intervals, the highest frequency supported by the sensors.
This recording interval enabled calculation of wind speed variance
within each photographic sampling period, capturing gustiness lost with
longer averaging periods.

To systematically organize our heterogeneous monitoring efforts, we
defined discrete monitoring periods as deployment units. Each deployment
represented a unique combination of monitoring location, camera
configuration (including camera ID, mounting height, and viewing angle),
associated wind measurements, and temporal coverage period. Since
equipment was frequently reused across locations and time periods, this
deployment-based structure provided standardized sampling units that
accounted for variation in environmental conditions and equipment
configurations while treating each deployment as independent for
statistical analyses. This approach produced time-series images from
each deployment for estimating monarch cluster abundance through
systematic grid-based counting methods, enabling analysis of abundance
patterns in relation to wind speed and other environmental variables.

### Image Analysis

#### Grid-based Counting Method

To quantify changes in monarch butterfly abundance from collected
imagery, we developed a systematic grid-based counting protocol
balancing accuracy with the practical constraints of analyzing tens of
thousands of images. This approach addressed the challenge of estimating
abundance in large aggregations where individual counts would be
prohibitively time-consuming and emulated field researcher methods,
including those used in the annual Thanksgiving Count (Xerces Society
2017). We subdivided each image using a grid overlay system where human
labelers assigned order-of-magnitude estimates per cell. Grid dimensions
remained fixed throughout each deployment to ensure consistency. Custom
software developed using the Electron framework in JavaScript
facilitated this labeling effort.

Grid cell size varied by deployment based on camera-to-cluster distance.
Cell dimensions were optimized to ensure most occupied cells contained
butterflies in the 10--99 count range, balancing classification
efficiency with spatial resolution. This standardization minimized cells
alternating between widely different order-of-magnitude categories
across the time series.

#### Counting Protocol

Human labelers estimated butterfly abundance within each grid cell using
four order-of-magnitude categories: 0 (no butterflies), 1--9 (single
digits), 10--99 (dozens), and 100--999 (hundreds). Labelers trained
using a comprehensive online guide with example images and detailed
classification criteria
(<https://kylenessen.github.io/monarch_trailcam_classifier/>). The
protocol prioritized efficiency while maintaining consistency across
observers.

Because abundance estimates derived exclusively from two-dimensional
photographic images, our classification protocol quantified only
butterflies visible in the image plane without estimating
three-dimensional cluster structure or depth. This approach
intentionally excluded hidden individuals behind visible butterflies in
overlapping aggregations, providing a conservative but consistent
measure reflecting observable surface area rather than total volume. For
cells containing partial butterflies at grid boundaries, labelers
included these in counts unless double-counting would cause an adjacent
cell to move to a higher category. When butterfly counts fluctuated
between categories across the time series, we consistently applied the
lower estimate to maintain conservative abundance estimates.

In addition to estimating monarch abundance, labelers recorded whether
cells received direct sunlight. Direct sunlight classification presented
challenges because oversaturated conditions eliminated the contrast
enabling butterfly detection in shaded areas. Labelers classified cells
as receiving direct sunlight when branches or butterflies exhibited
additional illumination clearly from direct rather than indirect light,
even when individual butterflies became difficult to distinguish due to
pixel oversaturation. This classification required careful attention to
subtle shape recognition and contextual awareness about butterfly
locations established from previous images in the time series. This
measurement was recorded only for occupied cells and stored separately.

Labelers received ongoing feedback throughout the classification
process. All classifications underwent review for common errors
including mislabeled cells, incorrect category assignments, and
inconsistent counting criteria application. Direct communication of
corrections to labelers ensured consistent protocol application.

#### Abundance Calculation

We calculated an abundance index for each frame by summing the products
of cell counts and their assigned category values across all grid cells,
employing conservative estimates using minimum values within each
order-of-magnitude category:

$$\text{Abundance index} = \sum_{i}^{}\rho_{i} \times C_{i}$$

where $\rho_{i}$ represents the number of cells in category $i$, and
$C_{i}$ represents the conservative estimate for that category. We used
minimum category values ($C_{1} = 1$ for category 1--9, $C_{2} = 10$ for
category 10--99, and $C_{3} = 100$ for category 100--999) rather than
midpoint or maximum values to ensure temporal analyses reflected genuine
population shifts rather than estimation uncertainty.

### Temperature Data Extraction

Temperature represents a critical environmental variable influencing
monarch activity patterns and potentially confounding wind effects.
Ambient temperature data were extracted from trail camera images using
optical character recognition (OCR). Each camera displayed temperature
readings on the image overlay, but these values were not accessible
through EXIF metadata, necessitating visual extraction methods. We
developed an automated Python script utilizing OCR technology to extract
temperature values from approximately 56,000 images across all
deployments. The extraction process employed multiple preprocessing
strategies and pattern matching algorithms to accommodate variations in
image quality and display characteristics.

Following initial automated extraction, we manually reviewed and
corrected edge cases where OCR failed or produced anomalous values. All
temperature data underwent systematic quality control through
visualization of deployment-specific time series, enabling
identification and correction of erroneous values. This process ensured
complete temperature coverage for all analyzed images, providing the
ambient temperature covariate required for our statistical models.

### Statistical Analysis

#### Data Preparation

Statistical analysis employed a lag-based framework to capture the
temporal dynamics of butterfly responses to environmental changes,
comparing butterfly counts between consecutive 30-minute intervals.
Observation pairs were constructed by matching counts at time $t$ with
counts at time $t - 30$ minutes, applying a Â±5 minute tolerance window
to accommodate minor temporal variations in image capture. The response
variable (change in butterfly abundance between time points) underwent
cube root transformation to achieve approximate normality while
preserving directional information:
$y = \text{sign}(\Delta) \times |\Delta|^{1/3}$, where $\Delta$
represents the difference in butterfly counts. While exploratory data
analysis revealed generally well-behaved distributions, we observed
bimodality in the raw butterfly abundance data driven primarily by a
single anomalous event at deployment SC8. At this deployment, a large
butterfly aggregation abruptly declined to near zero without
corresponding changes in the measured environmental variables (wind
speed, temperature, or solar exposure). This singular event was unlike
any other observation in the dataset. We retained this deployment in the
final analysis for two reasons: first, to maximize sample size and avoid
arbitrary data exclusion, and second, sensitivity analysis showed that
the cube root transformation of abundance differences adequately
addressed the distributional concerns, with model selection and
parameter estimates remaining consistent whether SC8 was included or
excluded. The transformation approach made the anomaly's inclusion or
exclusion immaterial to the final results. Observation pairs where both
time points recorded zero butterflies were excluded as uninformative,
reducing the dataset from approximately 2,500 potential pairs to 1,894
analyzable observations across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

#### Variable Selection

Predictor variables were selected to test specific hypotheses while
avoiding multicollinearity. Maximum wind gust speed during each
30-minute interval served as the primary wind metric, with alternative
wind measurements (average sustained speed, modal gust, gust standard
deviation) excluded due to high correlation ($r > 0.75$). Environmental
predictors included average temperature between observation pairs,
number of butterflies in direct sunlight at the previous time point, and
minutes elapsed since the first observation of each day to capture
diurnal patterns. Total butterfly count at the previous time point was
included as a control variable, enabling distinction between
proportional and absolute changes in abundance. When included, this
variable tests effects on proportional change; when excluded, models
test effects on absolute change.

#### Model Framework

Analysis employed generalized additive mixed models (GAMMs) implemented
through the mgcv package in R. Model selection followed an
information-theoretic approach, comparing 48 candidate models using
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The candidate set comprised two
fundamental frameworks: models including the lag abundance term (24
models) and models excluding it (24 models), with each framework
containing null models, single predictor models, additive combinations,
two- and three-way interactions, and models incorporating smooth terms
for non-linear relationships. Random effects structure accounted for
variation at three hierarchical levels: deployment location, observer,
and deployment-day. Temporal autocorrelation within days was addressed
using a first-order autoregressive (AR1) correlation structure grouped
by deployment-day. All models were fitted using restricted maximum
likelihood (REML) estimation.

To test specifically for threshold effects at the proposed 2 m/s
disruptive wind speed, we conducted a sensitivity analysis using an
alternative wind metric. We repeated the entire model selection process,
replacing maximum wind gust speed with a threshold-based predictor: the
count of minutes within each 30-minute observation period where wind
gusts equaled or exceeded 2 m/s. This variable ranged from 0 to 30
minutes and was tested using the same 48 model structures, allowing
direct comparison of continuous versus threshold-based wind effects.

#### Model Validation

Model assumptions were verified through standard residual diagnostics
including examination of residual distributions, fitted versus residual
plots, and quantile-quantile plots. Convergence was confirmed for all
candidate models in both the primary and sensitivity analyses. Model
performance and predictor significance were evaluated through AIC
comparison, with models differing by less than 2 AIC units considered
equivalent.

#### Statistical Power Analysis

To evaluate whether our study had adequate statistical power to detect
wind effects if present, we conducted a simulation-based power analysis.
This approach assessed our ability to detect various effect sizes given
our sample size of 1,894 paired observations. We simulated 200 datasets
from the best-fitting model (which excluded wind effects) and
artificially introduced wind effects of known magnitude ranging from
0.05 to 0.20 standard deviations of the response variable. For each
effect size, we refitted models including wind terms to determine the
proportion of simulations where the artificial effect was detected as
statistically significant ($\alpha = 0.05$). This simulation approach
accounts for the complexity of our GAMM framework and hierarchical data
structure, providing robust estimates of statistical power for detecting
wind effects across a range of biologically plausible magnitudes.

## Results

### Descriptive [This is a really nice addition. Thank you.]{.comment-start id="1575825837" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:42:25"}Statistics[]{.comment-end id="1575825837"}

Environmental conditions varied substantially across the 78-day
monitoring period at Spring Canyon and UDMH during the 2023-2024
overwintering season. The dataset comprised 1,894 observations collected
at 30-minute intervals during daylight hours (07:00--17:00) from
November 17, 2023, to February 4, 2024, totaling 947 observation hours
across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

Wind speeds ranged from complete calm to moderately strong conditions,
with maximum gusts reaching 12.4 m/s (mean = 2.2 Â± 1.4 m/s, median = 2.2
m/s). The interquartile range of 1.3--3.0 m/s indicated that most
observations occurred under relatively mild wind conditions. Temperature
showed considerable variation throughout the monitoring period, ranging
from 3.0 to 30.0Â°C (mean = 14.6 Â± 3.8Â°C, median = 14.0Â°C), with an
interquartile range of 12.5--17.0Â°C typical of California coastal winter
conditions. Direct solar exposure occurred in 31.7% of observations (n =
601), with butterflies actively basking when present in sunlight,
averaging 17.0 individuals in direct sun (range: 1--295).

Monarch abundance exhibited high variability across sites and time
periods. Butterfly counts ranged from 0 to 770 individuals per
observation, with a mean of 81.4 Â± 100.0 butterflies and a median of 37
butterflies. The wide interquartile range (9--119 butterflies) reflected
substantial variation in cluster sizes. [When you stay, the 5.3% of
variance explained, you might refer back to this fact as a possible
reason. This is a fairly small proportion of the entire data
set.]{.comment-start id="1963796589" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T07:44:13"}Zero-count observations, representing either
the beginning of cluster formation or cluster dissolution, comprised
2.3% of the dataset (n = 43).[]{.comment-end id="1963796589"}

Cluster sizes varied markedly among the 10 deployment locations. Site
SC10 recorded the largest aggregation with 770 monarchs, while mean
abundances ranged from 0 at SC9 to 325.8 at UDMH2. Eight deployments
observed maximum cluster sizes exceeding 100 butterflies, with mean
maximum cluster size across sites reaching 315.6 individuals. This
variation in cluster sizes across deployments reflects the heterogeneous
distribution of monarchs across overwintering [change to \"clustering
locations\" since you have questioned this concept of
microhabitat.]{.comment-start id="788085934"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T07:45:45"}microhabitats
[]{.comment-end id="788085934"}within the study sites.

The comprehensive temporal coverage, with observations at 30-minute
intervals capturing 16.5 observations per deployment-day on average,
provided fine-scale resolution of monarch behavioral responses to
changing environmental conditions. Peak observation activity occurred at
16:00 hours (196 observations), corresponding with afternoon warming
periods when monarchs typically exhibit increased movement.

### Summary of Data and Model Selection

[Testing of 48 candidate models identified M23 as the best-fit
model.]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:58:08.76Z"} Environmental factors, but not wind,
drove monarch abundance changes in 1,894 paired observations from 115
monitoring periods at two overwintering sites during the 2023-2024
season. [Testing of 48 candidate models identified M23 as the best-fit
model.]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T14:58:04.494Z"}[]{.paragraph-deletion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T14:58:04.493Z"}

Model M23 included smooth terms for previous butterfly count,
temperature, butterflies in direct sun, and time since sunrise,
achieving an AIC value of 8081.848 (TableÂ [1.1](#tab:model_selection)).
M23 captured all the model weight across 48 candidates (AIC = 8081.8),
with the next best model ÎAIC = 4.8. Wind variables appeared in only one
of the top five models (M24), which included maximum wind speed but
performed substantially worse than M23 (ÎAIC = 6.2), with the wind
effect showing weak evidence of an association (p = 0.218).

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                  AIC        ÎAIC    Weight  Wind p
  ------- -------------------------------------- -------- ------ --------- -------
  M23     Previous butterfly count, Temperature, 8081.8      0.0     1.000      NA

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                            
          sunrise                                                          

  M22     Previous butterfly count, Temperature  8086.6      4.8   \<0.001      NA
          (linear),                                                        

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                            
          sunrise                                                          

  M24     Previous butterfly count, Maximum wind 8088.0      6.2   \<0.001   0.218
          speed,                                                           

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct                               
          sun, Time since sunrise                                          

  M47     Temperature, Butterflies in direct     8101.3     19.4   \<0.001      NA
          sun,                                                             

          Time since sunrise                                               

  M17     Previous butterfly count, Temperature, 8105.9     24.0   \<0.001      NA

          Butterflies in direct sun                                        
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:model_selection .anchor}Model selection results showing the
  top five candidate models from 48 tested, ranked by AIC. Model terms
  are shown with their respective AIC values, ÎAIC relative to the best
  model, and AIC weights calculated across all 48 models. Wind p-values
  are shown where applicable; NA indicates the model did not include
  wind variables.

### Analysis of the Best-Fit Model

The best-fit model (M23) explained 5.7% of variance in monarch abundance
changes (adjusted RÂ² = 0.057). The model formula was:

$$\text{Change in abundance} \sim s(\text{Previous butterfly count}) + s(\text{Temperature}) + s(\text{Butterflies in direct sun}) + s(\text{Time since sunrise})$$

where $s()$ denotes smooth terms. All four smooth terms showed
significant effects on monarch abundance changes.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Term                              EDF   Ref.Â df    F-value      p-value
  ----------------------------- ------- --------- ---------- ------------
  Previous butterfly count         2.62      2.62      12.02     8.26e-07

  Temperature                      3.93      3.93       3.23        0.028

  Butterflies in direct sun        1.53      1.53      19.36     1.22e-05

  Time since sunrise               4.90      4.90       8.90      \<2e-16
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Summary of smooth terms in the best-fit model (M23). EDF represents
  effective degrees of freedom, indicating the complexity of each smooth
  relationship.

All four predictors in the best-fit model showed significant effects on
monarch abundance changes (FigureÂ [1.1](#fig:partial_effects)). The
previous butterfly count exhibited a significant non-linear negative
relationship (EDF = 2.62, F = 12.02, p \< 0.001), with increasingly
negative changes as the previous count increased, indicating
proportionally greater departures from larger aggregations. Butterflies
in direct sun showed a strong negative effect on roost abundance (EDF =
1.53, F = 19.36, p \< 0.001), with greater numbers in direct sun
associated with larger decreases in total abundance.

Time since sunrise revealed a pronounced diurnal pattern (EDF = 4.90, F
= 8.90, p \< 0.001), with monarchs departing clusters throughout the
morning and reaching peak departures approximately 3.25 hours after
sunrise. Cluster reformation began in the afternoon, with most
butterflies returning around 8.25 hours after sunrise, capturing the
characteristic daily rhythm of monarch activity at overwintering sites.
Temperature exhibited a complex non-linear relationship (EDF = 3.93, F =
3.23, p = 0.028). Below the flight threshold (blue vertical band) of
12.7-16Â°C established by Masters et al. (1988), temperature had minimal
effect on cluster abundance. Above this threshold, clusters reformed as
temperatures increased up to 25Â°C, with peak reformation occurring
around 21Â°C. Beyond 25Â°C, the pattern reversed, with each additional
degree Celsius increasing departure rates from clusters.

[]{#fig:partial_effects
.anchor}![](media/image1.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="4.861111111111111in"}

Partial effects of the four significant predictors on monarch abundance
change in a 2x2 layout. The partial effect on monarch abundance as
estimated from the single attribute being compared to abundance while
assuming all other attribute values are held constant. Top row:
butterflies in direct sun (left) and previous butterfly count (right).
Bottom row: time since sunrise in minutes (left) and temperature in Â°C
(right). Solid lines show the estimated smooth functions with 95%
confidence intervals (shaded regions). All effects are shown on the same
scale for comparison.

### Evaluation of the Disruptive Wind Hypothesis

Our analysis provided no support for the three hierarchical wind
hypotheses:

First, wind did not act as a disruptive force to overwintering monarchs.
Among our 48 candidate models, wind appeared in only one of the top five
models (M24), where it showed little evidence of an effect (p = 0.218)
and resulted in substantially poorer model performance compared to the
best model (ÎAIC = 6.2). The partial effect of maximum wind speed from
this model remains flat with wide uncertainty across the observed range,
reinforcing the lack of a coherent signal
(FigureÂ [1.2](#fig:m24_wind_partial_effect)).

[]{#fig:m24_wind_partial_effect
.anchor}![](media/image2.png){width="3.7916666666666665in"
height="3.1597222222222223in"}

Partial effect of maximum wind speed on monarch abundance change from
model M24. The flat relationship with wide confidence intervals
demonstrates no clear effect of wind on butterfly departures. The red
dashed line indicates the proposed 2Â m/s disruptive threshold.

Second, we found no evidence for disruption above the proposed 2Â m/s
threshold. A sensitivity analysis using a specific threshold predictor
('minutes with wind speed \> 2Â m/s') confirmed this lack of a threshold
effect, as models with this variable performed poorly and did not rank
among the top candidates (TableÂ [1.3](#tab:threshold_model_selection)).
Visually, the relationship between wind and monarch abundance change
remained flat across the 2Â m/s boundary
(FigureÂ [1.3](#fig:wind_scatter)). With mean maximum wind speeds of
2.2Â m/s (SD = 1.4Â m/s), conditions that should have revealed threshold
effects if present, no disruption occurred at or above this boundary.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                  AIC        $\Delta$AIC    Weight  Wind p
  ------- -------------------------------------- -------- ------------- --------- -------
  T24     Previous butterfly count, Minutes      8089.4             7.6     0.021   0.372
          above 2Â m/s,                                                            

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct                                      
          sun, Time since sunrise                                                 

  T44     Minutes above 2Â m/s, Temperature,      8108.4            26.5   \<0.001   0.256

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                                   
          sunrise                                                                 

  T21     Previous butterfly count, Minutes      8110.6            28.7   \<0.001   0.053
          above 2Â m/s,                                                            

          Temperature, Butterflies in direct sun                                  

  T43     Minutes above 2Â m/s, Temperature       8115.5            33.7   \<0.001   0.275
          (linear),                                                               

          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since                                   
          sunrise                                                                 

  T19     Previous butterfly count, Minutes      8119.8            37.9   \<0.001   0.078
          above 2Â m/s,                                                            

          Temperature (linear), Butterflies in                                    
          direct sun                                                              
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:threshold_model_selection .anchor}Model selection results
  from sensitivity analysis using wind threshold predictor (minutes with
  wind speed \> 2 m/s). Poor model performance ([state - relative to
  what model.]{.comment-start id="892737638"
  author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T08:02:07"}high
  $\Delta$AIC values[]{.comment-end id="892737638"}) demonstrates lack
  of support for the 2 m/s disruption threshold.

Third, wind's effects did not scale with intensity. The relationship
remained flat across all observed wind speeds (0--12Â m/s), with
confidence intervals consistently encompassing zero
(FigureÂ [1.3](#fig:wind_scatter)).

[]{#fig:wind_scatter
.anchor}![](media/image3.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="3.499998906386702in"}

Relationship between maximum wind speed (m/s) and monarch abundance
change. The red dashed line shows the proposed 2 m/s disruptive wind
threshold, while the flat trend line indicates no effect of wind on
butterfly departures. Points represent 30-minute observation periods.

### Statistical Power to Detect Wind Effects

Post-hoc power analysis confirmed our study had adequate statistical
power to detect biologically meaningful wind effects
(TableÂ [1.4](#tab:power_analysis)). With 1,894 paired observations, we
achieved 87.5% power to detect moderate effect sizes (0.15 standard
deviations) and 98.5% power to detect larger effects (0.20 standard
deviations). Power for small effects (0.10 standard deviations) was 56%,
while very small effects (0.05 standard deviations) yielded only 16.5%
power. These results indicate that our failure to detect wind effects is
unlikely due to insufficient statistical power for effect sizes of
biological relevance.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             Effect Size (SD units)      Power (Proportion) Power (%)
  ------- ------------------------- ----------------------- -------------
  0.05                         0.05                   0.165 16.5%

  0.1                          0.10                   0.560 56%

  0.15                         0.15                   0.875 87.5%

  0.2                          0.20                   0.985 98.5%
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:power_analysis .anchor}Estimated power to detect wind
  effects of varying magnitudes. Effect sizes are expressed in standard
  deviations of the response variable (cube root transformed change in
  butterfly abundance).

### Model Diagnostics

Model residuals showed distinct linear banding patterns consistent with
the discrete counting method used to estimate butterfly abundance, while
the Q-Q plot indicated approximately normal residual distribution with
minor tail deviations (FigureÂ [1.4](#fig:diagnostics)).

[]{#fig:diagnostics
.anchor}![](media/image4.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.9166666666666665in"}

Model diagnostics for M23. Left: Residuals versus fitted values showing
banding that reflects the discrete counting method, with smoothed
relationship shown in blue. Right: Normal Q-Q plot of model residuals
showing reasonable normality with minor tail deviations.

## Discussion

### Wind Does Not Disrupt Overwintering Monarch Butterflies

Our study provides the first direct empirical test of the disruptive
wind hypothesis and finds no support for wind as a primary factor
influencing monarch butterfly clustering behavior. Despite the
widespread adoption of the 2 m/s wind threshold in conservation practice
(Society 2016), our data reveal no relationship between wind speed and
butterfly departures across the full range of observed conditions (0--12
m/s). While our models explain only 5.7% of variance in butterfly
movements, reflecting our focus on testing wind effects rather than
comprehensively explaining movement patterns, they had sufficient
statistical power to detect environmental signals. This finding
challenges assumptions underlying three decades of management guidance.

The absence of wind effects in our data is particularly striking given
that observed mean maximum wind speeds (2.2 m/s, SD = 1.4) frequently
exceeded the proposed threshold. If the disruptive wind hypothesis were
valid, we should have observed a clear signal: substantial reductions in
butterfly abundance, as predicted by the disruptive wind hypothesis.
Instead, we observed no change, small changes, or even positive changes
in butterfly abundance at wind speeds six times the proposed disruption
threshold.

Importantly, our power analysis demonstrated 87.5% power to detect
moderate effect sizes (0.15 standard deviations) and 98.5% power for
larger effects (0.20 standard deviations), while wind appeared in only
one of the top five models (M24). In that model wind showed little
evidence of an effect (p = 0.218) and resulted in substantially poorer
model performance compared to the best model (ÎAIC = 6.2, capturing only
4% of model weight). This weak wind signal, combined with our high
statistical power, allows us to rule out all but very small wind
effects. Given that the disruptive wind hypothesis predicts conspicious
reduction in abundance above threshold wind speeds, a substantial effect
by any measure, our failure to detect such patterns provides strong
evidence against the hypothesis rather than merely absence of evidence.

The methodological validity of our approach is confirmed by the strong
signals detected for other environmental variables. Had our counting
method or analytical framework been flawed, we would not have captured
the pronounced effects of direct sunlight (F = 19.36, p \< 0.001) or the
complex diurnal patterns (F = 8.90, p \< 0.001) that emerged from the
same dataset.

### Alternative Drivers of Monarch Movement

While our study was designed specifically to test the wind hypothesis,
our results suggest that thermoregulation, light exposure, and diurnal
rhythms play more important roles than wind in driving short-term
movements at overwintering sites.

#### Direct Sunlight as the Strongest Predictor

Direct sunlight exposure emerged as the strongest environmental
predictor of reductions in cluster abundance in our study (F = 19.36, p
\< 0.001). Butterflies exposed to direct sunlight at the beginning of an
observation interval showed the largest decreases in abundance,
suggesting that solar radiation rapidly increases butterfly body
temperatures well above ambient conditions. This finding aligns with
Masters, Malcolm, and Brower (1988)'s work showing that monarchs in
direct sunlight can elevate their body temperature above ambient
conditions within minutes. This rapid warming capability could readily
explain why direct sunlight exposure is such a strong predictor of
decreased abundance at clusters.

The relationship between sunlight and departure represents a key
component of the thermoregulatory equation. Monarchs have evolved to
efficiently absorb solar radiation, an adaptation that enables flight at
temperatures below what would otherwise be physiologically possible
(Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988). Yet this same efficiency becomes a
liability when clustering. Butterflies cannot avoid absorbing heat when
exposed to direct sun, risking overheating and accelerated depletion of
their finite lipid reserves through elevated metabolism (Masters,
Malcolm, and Brower 1988). This forces them to abandon energetically
favorable clustering positions even when ambient temperatures remain
cool. This trade-off between the benefits of clustering and the thermal
constraints imposed by solar exposure may fundamentally shape daily
movement patterns at overwintering sites.

#### Temperature Effects and Their Interpretation

Ambient temperature showed a subtle but significant relationship with
monarch abundance changes (EDF = 3.93, F = 3.23, p = 0.028). The data
suggest minimal change below 15Â°C (the known flight threshold), a slight
positive association around 20--21Â°C, and sharp declines above 25Â°C
consistent with thermoregulatory constraints. Given that available
temperatures vary latitudinally across overwintering sites (Saniee and
Villablanca 2022), our results from Spring Canyon capture only a portion
of the temperature continuum experienced across the entire overwintering
range. The temperature effects we observed reflect responses within the
specific thermal envelope available at our study latitude. Testing these
patterns at sites spanning the full latitudinal gradient would reveal
whether monarch responses to temperature are consistent or vary with
local thermal regimes.

#### Diurnal Activity Patterns

Time since sunrise revealed distinct diurnal patterns (EDF = 4.90, F =
8.90, p \< 0.001), with butterflies departing clusters in the morning
and reforming aggregations in the afternoon. This pattern persists even
after controlling for temperature and sunlight, aligning with anecdotal
observations from overwintering sites throughout California.

### Study Limitations

Several limitations warrant consideration. Our data derive from a single
season (2023--2024) with typical monarch abundance at two sites. The
following season (2024--2025), virtually no clustering monarchs were
observed at Vandenberg Space Force Base (23 individuals total) despite
monitoring 10 sites. This coincided with the second-lowest overwintering
population on record statewide (Xerces Society 2025b), preventing
temporal replication of our study. Additionally, our counting
methodology introduced discretization artifacts that contributed to
large confidence intervals for environmental predictors. While we
detected strong signals like direct sunlight effects, more subtle
relationships require careful interpretation.

Furthermore, our study observed clusters where butterflies maintained
direct substrate contact. In historically massive aggregations
containing hundreds of thousands of individuals, many butterflies attach
only to other butterflies, creating multi-layered formations. If
substrate attachment confers greater wind resistance than
butterfly-to-butterfly attachment, the disruptive wind hypothesis might
apply specifically to these larger aggregations. Future work should
examine whether wind responses differ between substrate-attached and
butterfly-attached individuals, particularly at sites supporting extreme
densities.

### Management Implications

Our findings suggest that management strategies prioritizing wind
protection warrant reconsideration. The absence of wind effects despite
frequent threshold exceedances indicates that usable habitat within
existing groves may be larger than currently recognized. Areas
previously dismissed due to perceived wind exposure may provide suitable
conditions because they offer appropriate light and thermal regimes.

While past management efforts aimed at wind protection may have been
based on incomplete understanding, they likely produced beneficial
outcomes by increasing tree density. The fundamental recommendation to
plant and maintain trees remains sound. Management should prioritize
maintaining existing mature trees while establishing future roosting
habitat at densities that support healthy, long-lived growth. In
addition, as suggested by Saniee and Villablanca (2022), it may become
relevant to explore ways in which to manage for thermal attributes,
specifically sunlight.

### Future Research Directions

Our findings open several important avenues for future research. First,
explicit testing of light patterns as predictors of clustering locations
could establish whether canopy structure guides habitat selection. The
strong effect of direct sunlight (F = 19.36, p \< 0.001) combined with
the predictability of canopy-created light patterns suggests this may be
a primary factor in roost site selection. Previous research also
suggests light conditions may play an important role in habitat
selection. [(]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T15:04:29.521Z"}Weiss et al. [(]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T15:04:32.457Z"}1991)
used hemispherical photography to measure the Indirect Site Factor
(ISF), which quantifies percent canopy openness, across sites with
different occupancy histories. [Needs to be defined]{.comment-start
id="593497170" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T08:05:03"}Permanent []{.comment-end
id="593497170"}overwintering sites clustered within a narrow range of
canopy openness (approximately 20%) with relatively low variance, while
[Needs to be defined]{.comment-start id="13911021"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T08:05:14"}transient
[]{.comment-end id="13911021"}and unoccupied sites showed progressively
greater variability (Figure [1.5](#fig:weiss_canopy)). This pattern of
consistent light conditions at successful sites provides additional
context for understanding how canopy structure might influence
clustering behavior [and suggest that the microhabitat is defined by
light and]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T15:05:59.84Z"} [its behavioral association
with]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T15:06:29.128Z"} [temperatu]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-09-19T15:05:59.84Z"}[re]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T15:06:00.783Z"}.

[]{#fig:weiss_canopy
.anchor}![](media/image5.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="2.752923228346457in"}

Percent canopy openness (Indirect Site Factor) by occupancy status,
adapted from Weiss et al. (1991). Permanent overwintering sites exhibit
both a specific range of canopy openness (Â 20%) and lower variance
compared to transient and unoccupied/former sites.

Second, investigation of [Explain where this idea comes from\...
literature?]{.comment-start id="1420598833"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-09-19T08:07:15"}social
dynamics and positive behavioral feedback mechanisms []{.comment-end
id="1420598833"}could address unexplained variation in our models.
Monarchs may exhibit emergent clustering behaviors where initial
settlement increases the probability of others joining, creating
self-reinforcing patterns independent of environmental conditions.

Research should also examine whether our findings extend across the
broader overwintering range. Testing these patterns at sites with
different tree species, latitudes, and in particular population
densities would strengthen conclusions about the generality of wind
effects, or their absence.

### Conclusions

Wind did not disrupt monarch clusters even at speeds far exceeding
presumptive thresholds. Instead, butterflies responded primarily to
thermal conditions, including light exposure and ambient temperature,
and to diurnal rhythms. These findings challenge current assumptions
about overwintering habitat requirements and suggest that management
priorities should be reevaluated. While our study represents one season
at two sites, the absence of wind effects despite adequate statistical
power raises important questions regarding decades of conservation
guidelines. As monarch populations face continued threats,
evidence-based management becomes increasingly critical for conserving
the overwintering sites essential for this iconic species.

## References

Hristov, Nickolay I., Dionysios Nikolaidis, Tatjana Y. Hubel, and Louise
C. Allen. 2019. "Estimating Overwintering Monarch Butterfly Populations
Using Terrestrial LiDAR Scanning." *Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution*
7. <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2019.00266>.

Leong, Kingston L H. 2016. "Evaluation and Management of California
Monarch Winter Sites."

Leong, Kingston L. H. 1990. "Microenvironmental Factors Associated with
the Winter Habitat of the Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Danaidae) in
Central California." *Annals of the Entomological Society of America* 83
(5): 906--10. <https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/83.5.906>.

Masters, Alan R., Stephen B. Malcolm, and Lincoln P. Brower. 1988.
"Monarch Butterfly (Danaus Plexippus) Thermoregulatory Behavior and
Adaptations for Overwintering in Mexico." *Ecology* 69 (2): 458--67.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1940444>.

Saniee, Kiana, and Francis Villablanca. 2022. "Hierarchy and Scale
Influence the Western Monarch Butterfly Overwintering Microclimate."
*Frontiers in Conservation Science* 3.
<https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcosc.2022.844299>.

Society, Xerces. 2016. "State of the Monarch Overwintering Sites in
California."
<https://www.xerces.org/sites/default/files/2018-05/16-015_01_XercesSoc_State-of-Monarch-Overwintering-Sites-in-California_web.pdf>.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2024. "Endangered and Threatened
Wildlife and Plants; Threatened Species Status with Section 4(d) Rule
for Monarch Butterfly and Designation of Critical Habitat."
<https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/12/12/2024-28855/endangered-and-threatened-wildlife-and-plants-threatened-species-status-with-section-4d-rule-for>.

Weiss, Stuart B., Paul M. Rich, Dennis D. Murphy, William H. Calvert,
and Paul R. Ehrlich. 1991. "Forest Canopy Structure at Overwintering
Monarch Butterfly Sites: Measurements with Hemispherical Photography."
*Conservation Biology* 5 (2): 165--75.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.1991.tb00121.x>.

Xerces Society. 2017. "Step-by-Step Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count
Monitoring Guide."

---------. 2025a. "Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count and New Year's
Count Data, 1997-2025."
[WesternMonarchCount.com](https://WesternMonarchCount.com).

---------. 2025b. "Western Monarch Butterfly Population Declines to Near
Record Low." March 6, 2025.
<https://www.xerces.org/press/western-monarch-butterfly-population-declines-to-near-record-low>.
