# Introduction

The distribution and survival of invertebrate species are governed by a
complex interplay of biotic and abiotic factors. While biotic
interactions influence community assembly in part through predation,
competition, and parasitism (Blois-Heulin et al. 1990; Lafferty and Shaw
2013; Miller-ter Kuile et al. 2022), abiotic conditions often set the
fundamental limits determining where invertebrates can persist.
Temperature constrains invertebrate physiology across all latitudes,
from Antarctic midges (*Belgica antarctica*) that survive freeze-thaw
cycles through cryoprotective dehydration (Everatt et al. 2015), to
desert land snails (*Sphincterochila boissieri*) that tolerate 55°C
through metabolic downregulation (Schweizer, Triebskorn, and Köhler
2019). Rising temperatures directly increase metabolic rates and
respiratory water loss, creating compound stress that limits activity
windows (Chown, Sørensen, and Terblanche 2011). Solar radiation drives
both direct physiological impacts and behavioral responses. Army ants
demonstrate habitat-specific evolution of thermal maxima tied to
insolation exposure (Baudier et al. 2018), while terrestrial gastropods
climb vertical surfaces to escape ground-level heat and evolve
reflective pigmentation in exposed populations (Schweizer, Triebskorn,
and Köhler 2019). [not necessary as a transition sentence. you could
likely list other things also so it seems odd to pick out wind. I think
starting the next paragraph with wind is good.]{.comment-start id="1"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T20:46:00Z"}Among these abiotic
factors, wind emerges as a particularly complex environmental force
shaping invertebrate ecology through remarkably diverse
mechanisms.[]{.comment-end id="1"}

Wind influences invertebrate behavior and ecology through diverse
mechanisms that vary across species, exhibiting remarkably specific wind
detection thresholds and behavioral responses. Cockroaches perceive air
currents as low as 0.015--0.03 m/s, with [say what this is, a
cockroach?]{.comment-start id="2" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T20:47:00Z"}*Periplaneta americana* []{.comment-end
id="2"}demonstrating predictable orientation shifts from upwind movement
at low velocities to downwind escape at higher speeds (Bell and Kramer
1979). Mosquito flight activity shows sensitivity to even light winds,
with trap catches declining 75% when wind speeds approach their normal
flight velocity of 1.0 m/s, effectively grounding entire populations
(Bidlingmayer, Day, and Evans 1995). Some species exploit wind for
dispersal through specific behavioral triggers, such as spiders
exhibiting stereotypic 'tiptoe' behavior to initiate ballooning when
wind conditions permit controlled trajectories (Bonte and Lens 2007).
Others respond to wind as an environmental stressor requiring active
avoidance. Herbivorous larvae like[good to add a common name here or
some indicator of what this is]{.comment-start id="3" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T20:48:00Z"} *Uraba lugens* []{.comment-end id="3"}treat
moderate winds of 3 m/s as disturbance cues, triggering increased
movement to stable microsites on branches and behavioral shifts to
leeward sides and abaxial leaf surfaces for protection (Leonard,
McArthur, and Hochuli 2016).

Beyond direct physical effects, invertebrates detect wind through
indirect sensory pathways. The Namib desert beetle *Lepidochora
discoidalis* perceives substrate vibrations when winds exceeding 5 m/s
lift sand grains, using these cues to time surface foraging when
detritus becomes concentrated (Hanrahan and and Kirchner 1997). The
katydid *Copiphora brevirostris* adjusts vibratory communication to
avoid wind-induced noise, concentrating signaling between 2:00 and 5:00
AM when winds are calmest and exploiting short-term lulls during gusty
periods (Velilla et al. 2020). This complexity in wind-organism
interactions becomes particularly evident when examining species that
must navigate multiple life stages with different environmental
exposures.

The monarch butterfly (*Danaus plexippus*) offers an exceptional system
for studying how abiotic factors, particularly wind, shape invertebrate
ecology through its remarkable multi-generational migration. North
American monarchs complete an annual cycle that links vast northern
breeding ranges with small, highly specific overwintering sites (L.
Brower 1995; Solensky 2004; S. Jepsen et al. 2015). [The
continent]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T03:51:00Z"}[North America]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T03:51:00Z"} is home to two
populations [of monarchs]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T03:51:00Z"} separated by the Rocky Mountains: a larger
Eastern population and a Western population (Cockrell, Malcolm, and
Brower 1993; S. Jepsen et al. 2015; Freedman et al. 2021).[This was a
little confusing\... they are breeding while migrating north, or while
they are already in the north?]{.comment-start id="7" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T20:52:00Z"} During the spring and summer, multiple
short-lived generations of butterflies (2--5 weeks) breed throughout
North America, with females laying eggs exclusively on milkweed
(*Asclepias* spp.), the larval host plant (Zalucki 1982; Cockrell,
Malcolm, and Brower 1993). This breeding phase builds the population as
they radiate northward, but as late summer approaches, environmental
cues such as shortening day length and cooling temperatures trigger the
shift to the migratory generation ([]{.comment-end id="7"}Reppert and de
Roode 2018; Goehring and Oberhauser 2002; Herman and Tatar 2001; Barker
and Herman 1976). These migratory adults exhibit a unique phenotype:
they enter a state of reproductive diapause (suspended reproduction) and
possess elongated wings suited for long-distance travel (Barker and
Herman 1976; Yang et al. 2016; Tuskes and Brower 1978).

The fall migration begins as these long-lived adults (6--8 months)
orient themselves southward, flying up to thousands of kilometers,
[energy stores vs. drink as you go\...seem like two different
strategies\...?]{.comment-start id="8" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T20:54:00Z"}a journey fueled by energy stored as lipid
reserves accumulated from nectaring flowers along their route
[]{.comment-end id="8"}(Herman and Tatar 2001; Chaplin and Wells 1982;
Urquhart and Urquhart 1978). Navigational feats are guided by a
sophisticated system that includes a time-compensated sun compass
residing in the antennae, allowing them to maintain direction throughout
the day (Mouritsen and Frost 2002; Nguyen et al. 2021). Eastern monarchs
travel to the high-altitude oyamel fir (*Abies religiosa*) forests in
central Mexico, while the Western population migrates to overwintering
groves located along the Pacific coast of California (L. Brower 1995;
Urquhart and Urquhart 1978).

The overwintering period, lasting roughly from mid-October through
mid-March, represents an important phase of the annual migration where
the entire North American population concentrates into remarkably
small[,]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T03:56:00Z"}
forested areas (Solensky 2004; Vidal and Rendón-Salinas 2014; S. J.
Jepsen and Black 2015). During these months, monarchs must survive
exclusively on lipid reserves accumulated during [the]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T03:57:00Z"} autumn migration while
maintaining precise thermoregulatory balance (Chaplin and Wells 1982;
Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988). As ectotherms, monarchs face a
fundamental trade-off: they must maintain body temperatures cool enough
to conserve energy through metabolic suppression, yet warm enough to
permit essential daily movement (Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988;
Chaplin and Wells 1982; Kammer 1970; Alonso-Mejia and Arellano-Guillermo
1992). The flight threshold, established at 12.7-16.0°C for [So far you
have only introduced the eastern and western populations. unclear if
Mexican is different?]{.comment-start id="11" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T20:58:00Z"}Mexican populations[]{.comment-end id="11"},
represents the minimum thoracic temperature required for powered flight
(Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988). Below this threshold, monarchs
employ behavioral thermoregulation through dorsal basking, which can
elevate body temperature to flight capability within 30 seconds of sun
exposure, or through energetically costly shivering that consumes energy
25 times faster than resting (Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988).
Conversely, temperatures above 20°C risk terminating reproductive
diapause and triggering premature remigration, while direct sun exposure
can rapidly elevate thoracic temperatures to 33.6°C, forcing butterflies
to adopt sun-minimizing postures or engage in heat-dissipating flights
(Barker and Herman 1976, 1976). This delicate energetic balance means
that monarchs selecting overwintering sites must find locations that
minimize both freezing risk and elevated metabolic expenditure (Masters,
Malcolm, and Brower 1988; Alonso-Mejia and Arellano-Guillermo 1992;
Calvert, Zuchowski, and Brower 1983).

Building on early studies from Mexican overwintering sites that
identified abiotic factors limiting butterfly survival, Leong proposed
the microclimate hypothesis for western monarchs overwintering in
California (Kingston. L. H. Leong 1990). [Here you say call it one
hypothesis, the microclimate hypothesis. but then later you say \"wind
disruption hypothesis\" maybe consider organizing that better. like he
proposed a series of hypotheses \... which claim\.... blah
blah.]{.comment-start id="12" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:07:00Z"}This hypothesis posited that monarchs select
clustering locations within groves based on a measurable[]{.comment-end
id="12"} microenvironmental envelope characterized by four key
parameters: wind protection below [I think you should add this since
I\'ve heard people say the mph number.]{.comment-start id="13"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T20:59:00Z"}2 m/s [(5 MPH]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T03:59:00Z"}[]{.comment-end
id="13"}[)]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T03:59:00Z"}
to prevent cluster disruption, cool temperatures maintaining
reproductive diapause while avoiding freezing mortality, dappled
sunlight enabling behavioral thermoregulation, and high humidity with
accessible moisture to prevent desiccation (Kingston. L. H. Leong 1990;
Kingston L. H. Leong et al. 1991). Wind emerged as particularly critical
in this framework, though these conclusions derived from correlational
measurements rather than direct behavioral observations. Leong's initial
studies measured wind speeds at trees with and without butterfly
clusters, while noting that "during winter storms, the butterflies
clustered on those few trees that offered the greatest protection
against winds of 2 m/s or greater" (Kingston. L. H. Leong 1990), though
the highest wind speed measured in this study was 1.66 m/s. Based on
these correlational patterns, Leong reported that "butterflies cluster
in areas of the grove that offer exposure to filtered sunlight and
shelter from strong wind movement" (Kingston L. H. Leong et al. 1991).
In later publications, Leong described increasingly dramatic wind
effects through anecdotal observations, noting that "roosting
butterflies were blown from their clusters or dislodged by excessive
branch movements (shaking) caused by winds exceeding 2 m/sec" and that
"upon dislodgment, the butterflies flew to and resettled on foliage of
trees that offered better shelter from strong winds" (K. L. H. Leong
1999). When storm winds coincided with cold morning temperatures below
15°C, "the dislodged butterflies would be blown to the ground and remain
there until temperatures reached flight threshold," with "butterflies
littering the ground at the base of roosting trees" commonly observed
after winter storms (K. L. H. Leong 1999). Despite originating from
correlational field measurements and anecdotal [obervations]{.deletion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:01:00Z"}[observations]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:01:00Z"}, this hypothesis gained
widespread acceptance and directly informed management guidelines at
multiple levels. Leong's 2016 synthesis for California Department of
Fish and Wildlife formally established that "winds ≥ 2 m/s are
disruptive to the aggregating butterflies by blowing them from their
roosting branches or dislodging them by shaking the branches," and that
when subjected to such winds above flight threshold, butterflies "either
flew to a more sheltered area of the grove or, if no refuge area was
available, abandoned the grove temporarily or for the remainder of the
season" (Kingston L. H. Leong 2016). The microclimate hypothesis thus
dictated that successful overwintering sites must consistently exhibit
this specific suite of conditions, particularly wind protection [from \>
2 m/s wind speed]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T04:02:00Z"}, implying that these abiotic parameters
should guide habitat restoration efforts, a principle now widely adopted
in monarch conservation plans (Xerces Society 2016; S. Jepsen et al.
2017; E. Pelton 2020; Stuart B. Weiss and Rich 2008; Althouse & Meade,
Inc. and Creekside Science 2023).

However, empirical testing has gradually dismantled the microclimate
hypothesis's core assumption of a uniform environmental envelope. When
researchers tested whether monarchs select for consistent microclimatic
attributes across groves, they found that the realized microclimate
varied significantly with latitude and local geography (Saniee and
Villablanca 2022). Temperature responses proved more complex than
originally proposed, with monarchs avoiding freezing temperatures but
selecting the warmest of cold temperatures available at their latitude
(Fisher et al. 2018). Humidity requirements showed geographic
variability rather than consistency (Saniee and Villablanca 2022). Of
the four original parameters, only light exposure showed potential
support as a unifying factor, with successful overwintering sites
exhibiting consistent patterns of canopy openness (Saniee and
Villablanca 2022; Stuart B. Weiss et al. 1991). This geographic
variability in microclimate preferences, where selection occurs
hierarchically across multiple spatial scales rather than for a single
environmental envelope, fundamentally contradicts Leong's original
hypothesis (Fisher et al. 2018; Saniee and Villablanca 2022). The
gradual rejection of the uniform microclimate hypothesis through
empirical testing suggests that monarch habitat selection may be driven
by physiological and energetic constraints that vary with local
environmental conditions rather than by a rigid set of universal
requirements.

The [here you say this is a conponent of the one hypotholsis. Same
comment above about the hypothesis language.]{.comment-start id="19"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:08:00Z"}wind disruption component
of the hypothesis[]{.comment-end id="19"} stands apart as the only major
parameter that has never undergone direct empirical testing of butterfly
behavioral responses to wind exposure. [This is a key idea. Say it more
clearly. \" Despite being adopted in restoration efforts, no study
has\...\" It\'s too convoluted currently]{.comment-start id="20"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:05:00Z"}Despite wind protection
below 2 m/s being identified as a critical factor in Leong's framework
(Kingston L. H. Leong 2016), widely adopted in restoration efforts
(Xerces Society 2018; S. Jepsen et al. 2017; Althouse & Meade, Inc. and
Creekside Science 2023; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2024; Stuart B.
Weiss 2018), no study has established causal relationships between wind
exposure and butterfly behavior.[]{.comment-end id="20"} Leong's
methodology of comparing wind measurements between occupied and
unoccupied trees provided only correlational evidence, never directly
testing butterfly responses to wind exposure or distinguishing whether
butterflies actively avoid wind or whether wind simply correlates with
other unmeasured variables.

The absence of empirical testing for the wind disruption hypothesis
becomes critically important given the catastrophic decline of western
monarch populations. Between the 1980s and mid-2010s, populations
collapsed by approximately 97% (Schultz et al. 2017), with population
viability analyses revealing a 72% quasi-extinction risk within 20 years
(Schultz et al. 2017). The winter 2018 to 2019 count recorded fewer than
30,000 monarchs, a single-year drop of 86%, representing over 99%
decline from 1980s abundance (E. M. Pelton et al. 2019). The situation
reached its most critical state in 2020 when the Western Monarch
Thanksgiving Count documented only 1,901 butterflies, the lowest number
ever recorded (Xerces Society 2025a). While populations showed some
recovery in subsequent years, the 2024 to 2025 count of just 9,119
butterflies represents the second-lowest count on record, demonstrating
the population's continued precarity (Xerces Society 2025a). These
dramatic declines result from multiple interacting stressors including
breeding habitat loss, pesticide exposure, climate change, and
critically, the loss and degradation of overwintering habitat (Crone et
al. 2019; E. M. Pelton et al. 2019). Evidence increasingly suggests that
the overwintering stage represents the most limiting phase of the
monarch's annual cycle, with population declines concentrated during
winter and early spring periods (E. M. Pelton et al. 2019; Marini and
Zalucki 2017). California's coastal overwintering groves, where the
entire western population concentrates into [remarkably]{.deletion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:09:00Z"} small forested areas
from October through March, have thus emerged as [the focal point
of]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:09:00Z"}
[critical]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:09:00Z"}
conservation priorities. Yet management of these critical sites
continues to rely on the untested wind disruption hypothesis, with
restoration [I would love to know more about this. what do they do? I
think they also ignore or underinvest in groves where wind speeds are
too high. Or I heard of a project in which they cut down \"unneeded\"
trees that didn\'t contribute to reducing wind speeds.]{.comment-start
id="24" author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:34:00Z"}efforts investing
millions of[]{.comment-end id="24"} conservation dollars based on the
presumed necessity of maintaining wind speeds below 2 m/s (Althouse &
Meade, Inc. and Creekside Science 2023; The Monarch Press 2019).

Testing the wind disruption hypothesis requires addressing a fundamental
methodological challenge: isolating wind effects from confounding
environmental variables that naturally covary in field settings. Solar
radiation can trigger butterfly departures through direct heating,
enabling flight when ambient temperatures remain below thermal
thresholds (Masters, Malcolm, and Brower 1988; Kammer 1970). Temperature
independently influences activity patterns, with monarchs exhibiting
predictable responses as temperatures approach and exceed flight
thresholds (Barker and Herman 1976). Time of day creates inherent
activity rhythms related to sun angle and thermal conditions (Mouritsen
and Frost 2002). Furthermore, wind itself is multidimensional,
characterized not only by average speed but also by gustiness and
variability (Nathan et al. 2005) that could differentially affect
butterfly behavior. A rigorous test must therefore control for these
confounding factors while examining multiple aspects of wind exposure,
including both maximum wind speeds and duration above the proposed 2 m/s
threshold. With western monarch populations facing potential extinction
and limited conservation resources available, the need for empirically
validated management strategies has never been more urgent.

This study provides the first direct empirical test of whether wind
disrupts overwintering monarch butterflies. Our primary objective was to
evaluate the [foundational]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T04:37:00Z"} 2 m/s wind disruption threshold that has
guided over three decades of conservation practice. [move to
methods.]{.comment-start id="26" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:38:00Z"}We employed continuous monitoring at
30-minute intervals throughout the overwintering season, simultaneously
measuring wind speed, temperature, and solar radiation at butterfly
clustering locations. This approach enabled direct observation of
butterfly responses to changing environmental conditions while
controlling for confounding variables. We analyzed the data using an
information-theoretic framework that compared multiple competing models
to identify the strongest predictors of butterfly
movement.[]{.comment-end id="26"}

First, we hypothesized that wind, alongside other environmental factors,
predicts butterfly abundance at overwintering clusters. If true, we
predict that an [unclear what this is or what you mean]{.comment-start
id="27" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:39:00Z"}information-theoretic
approach[]{.comment-end id="27"} will identify wind as a significant
predictor of abundance changes, with monarch abundance decreasing when
exposed to higher wind speeds.

Second, we hypothesized that wind becomes disruptive above a specific
threshold of 2 m/s. If this threshold represents a meaningful biological
boundary, we predict that monarch abundance will decline at roosts
experiencing winds exceeding 2 m/s.

Third, we hypothesized that wind's disruptive effects scale with
intensity. If disruption increases with wind speed, we predict
proportionally greater decreases in monarch abundance as wind speeds
rise above the threshold.

## Materials and Methods

### Study Site

Site selection followed a systematic filtering process driven by project
requirements and practical constraints. The study was supported by a
federal grant that mandated research be conducted on federal lands. We
selected Vandenberg Space Force Base (VSFB, 34.7398°N, 120.5725°W) in
Santa Barbara County, California, based on several key advantages: mild
winters with infrequent frost events, extensive historical plantings of
blue gum eucalyptus (*Eucalyptus globulus*) that have created suitable
overwintering habitat throughout the installation, and restricted access
that provided security for long-term equipment deployment. The
[military]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:40:00Z"}
base contains thirty documented monarch overwintering groves, with
several sites consistently ranking within the top 10% of population
counts statewide over the past decade (Xerces Society 2025b).

Working with the base's monarch conservation coordinator, we initially
screened twelve locations from the thirty sites based on their
documented capacity to support monarch aggregations and provide
year-round access. This collaboration [confusing]{.comment-start id="31"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:41:00Z"}[I think you are trying
to explain how you went from 12 sites down to 2 but it\'s
confusing]{.comment-start id="32" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:42:00Z"}leveraged local expertise from managing
Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count activities for multiple years
[[]{.comment-end id="32"}]{.comment-end id="31"}(Xerces Society 2025b).
During [the]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:41:00Z"}
[this?]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:41:00Z"}study
period, ten of these sites were actively monitored [by who?]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:41:00Z"}. However, due to low
monarch populations during the 2023-2024 season and no observed
overwintering behavior in the 2024-2025 season, only two sites (Spring
Canyon and UDMH) produced measurable butterfly clusters suitable for our
[analysis]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T04:41:00Z"}[study]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T04:41:00Z"}.

Spring Canyon (34.6315°N, 120.6182°W) represents the most productive and
historically reliable overwintering site on VSFB. Located in South Base
within 300 meters of Space Launch Complex 4, this approximately
2.0-hectare site consists entirely of mature blue gum eucalyptus trees
reaching heights of approximately 40 meters. An unnamed perennial creek
runs through the center of the grove, creating a riparian corridor that
supports heterogeneous canopy structure with variable tree spacing and
diverse understory vegetation. Surf Road, an infrequently used paved
access road, bisects both the perennial creek and forest canopy.

The [second site,]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-01T04:43:00Z"} UDMH site (34.6719°N, 120.5950°W), also
located in South Base, comprises a 5.1-hectare eucalyptus grove planted
in windrows adjacent to a waste treatment facility. The uniformly spaced
trees maintain a largely clear understory with scattered low shrubs.
Although only recently documented as an overwintering location in 2022,
UDMH immediately emerged as a significant site, supporting over 6,000
monarchs during its [say year]{.comment-start id="39" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:44:00Z"}initial count[]{.comment-end id="39"} and
ranking among the base's highest population sites.

### Monitoring Strategy

Equipment deployment strategies differed between monitoring seasons to
accommodate research objectives and field experience. During th[is this
what you\'re calling the initial season?]{.comment-start id="41"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:46:00Z"}e 2023-2024
season[]{.comment-end id="41"}, we employed two strategies: targeted
deployments at sites with confirmed monarch presence, and anticipatory
deployments at locations where monarchs were expected based on
historical data but not currently observed. Targeted deployments
concentrated at Spring Canyon and UDMH where active aggregations were
documented throughout the season. Anticipatory deployments occurred at
four overwintering sites: additional locations within Spring Canyon and
UDMH, plus SLC-6 and Tangair. [In the 2024-2025 season, n]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:45:00Z"}[N]{.deletion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:45:00Z"}o monarchs were recorded
at [these]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:45:00Z"}
anticipatory deployment sites; consequently, these data are excluded
from analysis.

Building on insights from the [when was this?]{.comment-start id="45"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-09-30T21:45:00Z"}initial
season[]{.comment-end id="45"}, for the 2024-2025 season we modified our
approach to establish monitoring stations at ten sites before monarch
arrival, based on historical occurrence records compiled by the base
conservation coordinator. This expanded spatial coverage aimed to
capture greater environmental variation across potential overwintering
sites. However, the 2024-2025 season coincided with historically low
monarch abundance throughout California (Xerces Society 2025b),
resulting in no observed clustering behavior at any [of these
10]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:47:00Z"} monitored
location[s]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:47:00Z"}
[on base]{.deletion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:47:00Z"}.
[Ouch. I\'m sorry.]{.comment-start id="49" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-09-30T21:49:00Z"}Consequently, our final dataset comprises
two sites (Spring Canyon and UDMH) from the 2023-2024 season
only.[]{.comment-end id="49"}

### Field Equipment

To observe changes in monarch abundance in response to strong wind
events, we deployed remote monitoring equipment near butterfly clusters
at overwintering sites. Field observations utilized 15-meter telescoping
fiberglass poles (Max-Gain Systems, Inc., Marietta, GA) anchored at
three points using ground anchors with guy lines securing both the top
and base to create stable, freestanding structures.

Poles were positioned 4-17 meters from cluster locations. This range,
determined through field testing, balanced image resolution requirements
for our grid-based counting method against disturbance minimization.
Closer positioning compromised field of view, while greater distances
degraded butterfly visibility below classification thresholds. Pole
placement considered ground stability for the 15-meter structures,
infrastructure clearance requirements, and clear viewing angles. When
deploying near active clusters, we approached from directions that
minimized disturbance; no butterfly dispersal was observed during
equipment deployment.

We monitored monarch abundance using modified trail cameras (GardePro E7
and E8, Shenzhen, China) configured for near-infrared imaging to enhance
contrast between clustering butterflies and surrounding vegetation.
Trail cameras were selected for their durability [in]{.deletion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:48:00Z"} [for]{.insertion
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-01T04:48:00Z"} extended field
deployment, native time-lapse functionality, and modification potential.
Near-infrared wavelength selection followed previous literature
demonstrating effectiveness for butterfly population estimation (Hristov
et al. 2019).

Hardware modifications exploited the camera's internal filter-switching
mechanism by engaging nighttime mode to access the clear glass filter
position, then disconnecting power to prevent reversion to the infrared
cut filter. Near-infrared pass filters (\>850 nm) were mounted
externally to restrict incoming light to NIR wavelengths. This
configuration produced images where clustering butterflies appeared as
dark masses against bright eucalyptus foliage reflectance in the
near-infrared spectrum. Field validation confirmed sufficient contrast
for visual distinction of monarch clusters from background vegetation,
supporting our human-labeler analytical approach.

Cameras were mounted atop poles using lightweight tie-down straps and
positioned horizontally toward butterfly clusters at roosting height.
The wireless live view feature enabled real-time preview and precise
camera aiming during deployment. Cameras operated in time-lapse mode
with motion detection disabled.

Sampling interval selection balanced temporal resolution, battery life,
and data processing feasibility through empirical optimization and
rigorous statistical validation. Initial deployments used 10-minute
intervals to capture significant changes in butterfly abundance, which
preliminary observations indicated occurred on hourly rather than minute
scales, while maintaining approximately 6-week continuous operation.
Post-deployment statistical analysis using mixed-effects models and
information-theoretic approaches systematically compared multiple
sampling intervals across deployments. We conducted sequential subsample
analyses starting with full temporal resolution and progressively
testing reduced frequencies. Information-theoretic model comparison
using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) demonstrated that 30-minute
intervals provided optimal balance, losing less than 5% of information
compared to full temporal resolution (measured by root mean square
error) while reducing image classification workload by 67%. Variance
comparison analysis and visual assessment of fitted trend lines
confirmed that this interval preserved essential time-series patterns
including diurnal activity cycles, weather-response dynamics, and
multi-day population trends. Battery life constraints and field
deployment logistics further supported this interval choice, enabling
extended autonomous operation essential for capturing complete
behavioral sequences during variable weather conditions.

To quantify the wind conditions hypothesized to influence butterfly
behavior, wind monitoring equipment consisted of Rain Wise WindLog Wind
Data Loggers (Rain Wise Inc., Trenton, Maine) installed at pole apices
to measure wind at heights approximating butterfly roosting locations.
These instruments recorded average wind speed and maximum wind gust at
one-minute intervals, the highest frequency supported by the sensors.
This recording interval enabled calculation of wind speed variance
within each photographic sampling period, capturing gustiness lost with
longer averaging periods.

To systematically organize our heterogeneous monitoring efforts, we
defined discrete monitoring periods as deployment units. Each deployment
represented a unique combination of monitoring location, camera
configuration (including camera ID, mounting height, and viewing angle),
associated wind measurements, and temporal coverage period. Since
equipment was frequently reused across locations and time periods, this
deployment-based structure provided standardized sampling units that
accounted for variation in environmental conditions and equipment
configurations while treating each deployment as independent for
statistical analyses. This approach produced time-series images from
each deployment for estimating monarch cluster abundance through
systematic grid-based counting methods, enabling analysis of abundance
patterns in relation to wind speed and other environmental variables.

### Image Analysis

#### Grid-based Counting Method

To quantify changes in monarch butterfly abundance from collected
imagery, we developed a systematic grid-based counting protocol
balancing accuracy with the practical constraints of analyzing tens of
thousands of images. This approach addressed the challenge of estimating
abundance in large aggregations where individual counts would be
prohibitively time-consuming and emulated field researcher methods,
including those used in the annual Thanksgiving Count (Xerces Society
2018). We subdivided each image using a grid overlay system where human
labelers assigned order-of-magnitude estimates per cell. Grid dimensions
remained fixed throughout each deployment to ensure consistency. Custom
software developed using the Electron framework in JavaScript
facilitated this labeling effort.

Grid cell size varied by deployment based on camera-to-cluster distance.
Cell dimensions were optimized to ensure most occupied cells contained
butterflies in the 10--99 count range, balancing classification
efficiency with spatial resolution. This standardization minimized cells
alternating between widely different order-of-magnitude categories
across the time series.

#### Counting Protocol

Human labelers estimated butterfly abundance within each grid cell using
four order-of-magnitude categories: 0 (no butterflies), 1--9 (single
digits), 10--99 (dozens), and 100--999 (hundreds). Labelers trained
using a comprehensive online guide with example images and detailed
classification criteria
(<https://kylenessen.github.io/monarch_trailcam_classifier/>). The
protocol prioritized efficiency while maintaining consistency across
observers.

Because abundance estimates derived exclusively from two-dimensional
photographic images, our classification protocol quantified only
butterflies visible in the image plane without estimating
three-dimensional cluster structure or depth. This approach
intentionally excluded hidden individuals behind visible butterflies in
overlapping aggregations, providing a conservative but consistent
measure reflecting observable surface area rather than total volume. For
cells containing partial butterflies at grid boundaries, labelers
included these in counts unless double-counting would cause an adjacent
cell to move to a higher category. When butterfly counts fluctuated
between categories across the time series, we consistently applied the
lower estimate to maintain conservative abundance estimates.

In addition to estimating monarch abundance, labelers recorded whether
cells received direct sunlight. Direct sunlight classification presented
challenges because oversaturated conditions eliminated the contrast
enabling butterfly detection in shaded areas. Labelers classified cells
as receiving direct sunlight when branches or butterflies exhibited
additional illumination clearly from direct rather than indirect light,
even when individual butterflies became difficult to distinguish due to
pixel oversaturation. This classification required careful attention to
subtle shape recognition and contextual awareness about butterfly
locations established from previous images in the time series. This
measurement was recorded only for occupied cells and stored separately.

Labelers received ongoing feedback throughout the classification
process. All classifications underwent review for common errors
including mislabeled cells, incorrect category assignments, and
inconsistent counting criteria application. Direct communication of
corrections to labelers ensured consistent protocol application.

#### Abundance Calculation

We calculated an abundance index for each frame by summing the products
of cell counts and their assigned category values across all grid cells,
employing conservative estimates using minimum values within each
order-of-magnitude category:

$$\text{Abundance index} = \sum_{i}^{}\rho_{i} \times C_{i}$$

where $\rho_{i}$ represents the number of cells in category $i$, and
$C_{i}$ represents the conservative estimate for that category. We used
minimum category values ($C_{1} = 1$ for category 1--9, $C_{2} = 10$ for
category 10--99, and $C_{3} = 100$ for category 100--999) rather than
midpoint or maximum values to ensure temporal analyses reflected genuine
population shifts rather than estimation uncertainty.

### Temperature Data Extraction

Temperature represents a critical environmental variable influencing
monarch activity patterns and potentially confounding wind effects.
Ambient temperature data were extracted from trail camera images using
optical character recognition (OCR). Each camera displayed temperature
readings on the image overlay, but these values were not accessible
through EXIF metadata, necessitating visual extraction methods. We
developed an automated Python script utilizing OCR technology to extract
temperature values from approximately 56,000 images across all
deployments. The extraction process employed multiple preprocessing
strategies and pattern matching algorithms to accommodate variations in
image quality and display characteristics.

Following initial automated extraction, we manually reviewed and
corrected edge cases where OCR failed or produced anomalous values. All
temperature data underwent systematic quality control through
visualization of deployment-specific time series, enabling
identification and correction of erroneous values. This process ensured
complete temperature coverage for all analyzed images, providing the
ambient temperature covariate required for our statistical models.

### Statistical Analysis

#### Data Preparation

Statistical analysis employed a lag-based framework to capture the
temporal dynamics of butterfly responses to environmental changes,
comparing butterfly counts between consecutive 30-minute intervals.
Observation pairs were constructed by matching counts at time $t$ with
counts at time $t - 30$ minutes, applying a ±5 minute tolerance window
to accommodate minor temporal variations in image capture. The response
variable (change in butterfly abundance between time points) underwent
cube root transformation to achieve approximate normality while
preserving directional information:
$y = \text{sign}(\Delta) \times |\Delta|^{1/3}$, where $\Delta$
represents the difference in butterfly counts. While exploratory data
analysis revealed generally well-behaved distributions, we observed
bimodality in the raw butterfly abundance data driven primarily by a
single anomalous event at deployment SC8. At this deployment, a large
butterfly aggregation abruptly declined to near zero without
corresponding changes in the measured environmental variables (wind
speed, temperature, or solar exposure). This singular event was unlike
any other observation in the dataset. We retained this deployment in the
final analysis for two reasons: first, to maximize sample size and avoid
arbitrary data exclusion, and second, sensitivity analysis showed that
the cube root transformation of abundance differences adequately
addressed the distributional concerns, with model selection and
parameter estimates remaining consistent whether SC8 was included or
excluded. The transformation approach made the anomaly's inclusion or
exclusion immaterial to the final results. Observation pairs where both
time points recorded zero butterflies were excluded as uninformative,
reducing the dataset from approximately 2,500 potential pairs to 1,894
analyzable observations across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

#### Variable Selection

Predictor variables were selected to test specific hypotheses while
avoiding multicollinearity. Maximum wind gust speed during each
30-minute interval served as the primary wind metric, with alternative
wind measurements (average sustained speed, modal gust, gust standard
deviation) excluded due to high correlation ($r > 0.75$). Environmental
predictors included average temperature between observation pairs,
number of butterflies in direct sunlight at the previous time point, and
minutes elapsed since the first observation of each day to capture
diurnal patterns. Total butterfly count at the previous time point was
included as a control variable, enabling distinction between
proportional and absolute changes in abundance. When included, this
variable tests effects on proportional change; when excluded, models
test effects on absolute change.

#### Model Framework

Analysis employed generalized additive mixed models (GAMMs) implemented
through the mgcv package in R. Model selection followed an
information-theoretic approach, comparing 48 candidate models using
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The candidate set comprised two
fundamental frameworks: models including the lag abundance term (24
models) and models excluding it (24 models), with each framework
containing null models, single predictor models, additive combinations,
two- and three-way interactions, and models incorporating smooth terms
for non-linear relationships. Random effects structure accounted for
variation at three hierarchical levels: deployment location, observer,
and deployment-day. Temporal autocorrelation within days was addressed
using a first-order autoregressive (AR1) correlation structure grouped
by deployment-day. All models were fitted using restricted maximum
likelihood (REML) estimation.

To test specifically for threshold effects at the proposed 2 m/s
disruptive wind speed, we conducted a sensitivity analysis using an
alternative wind metric. We repeated the entire model selection process,
replacing maximum wind gust speed with a threshold-based predictor: the
count of minutes within each 30-minute observation period where wind
gusts equaled or exceeded 2 m/s. This variable ranged from 0 to 30
minutes and was tested using the same 48 model structures, allowing
direct comparison of continuous versus threshold-based wind effects.

#### Model Validation

Model assumptions were verified through standard residual diagnostics
including examination of residual distributions, fitted versus residual
plots, and quantile-quantile plots. Convergence was confirmed for all
candidate models in both the primary and sensitivity analyses. Model
performance and predictor significance were evaluated through AIC
comparison, with models differing by less than 2 AIC units considered
equivalent.

#### Statistical Power Analysis

To evaluate whether our study had adequate statistical power to detect
wind effects if present, we conducted a simulation-based power analysis.
This approach assessed our ability to detect various effect sizes given
our sample size of 1,894 paired observations. We simulated 200 datasets
from the best-fitting model (which excluded wind effects) and
artificially introduced wind effects of known magnitude ranging from
0.05 to 0.20 standard deviations of the response variable. For each
effect size, we refitted models including wind terms to determine the
proportion of simulations where the artificial effect was detected as
statistically significant ($\alpha = 0.05$). This simulation approach
accounts for the complexity of our GAMM framework and hierarchical data
structure, providing robust estimates of statistical power for detecting
wind effects across a range of biologically plausible magnitudes.

## Results

### Descriptive Statistics

Environmental conditions varied substantially across the 78-day
monitoring period at Spring Canyon and UDMH during the 2023-2024
overwintering season. The dataset comprised 1,894 observations collected
at 30-minute intervals during daylight hours (07:00--17:00) from
November 17, 2023, to February 4, 2024, totaling 947 observation hours
across 115 unique deployment-day combinations.

Wind speeds ranged from complete calm to moderately strong conditions,
with maximum gusts reaching 12.4 m/s (mean = 2.2 ± 1.4 m/s, median = 2.2
m/s). The interquartile range of 1.3--3.0 m/s indicated that most
observations occurred under relatively mild wind conditions.
Temperature[s]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-09T01:31:00Z"} showed considerable variation throughout
the monitoring period, ranging from 3.0 to 30.0°C (mean = 14.6 ± 3.8°C,
median = 14.0°C), with an interquartile range of 12.5--17.0°C typical of
California coastal winter conditions. Direct solar exposure occurred in
31.7% of observations (n = 601), with butterflies actively basking when
present in sunlight, a[I don\'t really understand how it\'s only 17
across 600 observations.]{.comment-start id="21" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-08T18:32:00Z"}veraging 17.0 individuals in direct
sun[]{.comment-end id="21"} (range: 1--295).

Monarch abundance exhibited high variability across sites and time
periods. Butterfly counts ranged from 0 to 770 individuals per
observation, with a mean of 81.4 ± 100.0 butterflies and a median of 37
butterflies. The wide interquartile range (9--119 butterflies) reflected
substantial variation in cluster sizes. Zero-count observations,
representing either the beginning of cluster formation or cluster
dissolution, comprised 2.3% of the dataset (n = 43).

Cluster sizes varied markedly among the 10 deployment locations. Site
SC10 recorded the largest aggregation with 770 monarchs, while mean
abundances ranged from 0 at SC9 to 325.8 at UDMH2. Eight deployments
observed maximum cluster sizes exceeding 100 butterflies, with mean
maximum cluster size across sites reaching 315.6 individuals. This
variation in cluster sizes across deployments reflects the heterogeneous
distribution of monarchs across overwintering microhabitats within the
study sites.

The comprehensive temporal coverage, with observations at 30-minute
intervals capturing 16.5 observations per deployment-day on average,
provided fine-scale resolution of monarch behavioral responses to
changing environmental conditions. Peak observation activity occurred at
16:00 hours (196 observations), corresponding with afternoon warming
periods when monarchs typically exhibit increased movement.

## [[\@Jenn Yost](mailto:jyost@calpoly.edu) [\@Francis X. Villablanca](mailto:fvillabl@calpoly.edu) New section with scatter plots]{.comment-start id="23" author="Kyle Nessen" date="2025-10-09T22:10:00Z"}Bivariate Relationship Between Wind and Cluster Dynamics[]{.comment-end id="23"}

Bivariate analyses examined whether wind speed alone could explain
changes in monarch cluster size, revealing no meaningful relationship
between maximum wind speed and cluster size changes at either temporal
scale (Figure [1](#fig:wind_bivariate_30min)
and [2](#fig:wind_bivariate_sunset)).

At 30-minute intervals, the correlation between maximum wind speed and
butterfly abundance change was negligible ([Instead of just an R
squared, you could do a regression to see if the slope is significantly
different from zero. A slope of zero is the null for a
regression]{.comment-start id="26" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T14:45:00Z"}r = 0.04[]{.comment-end id="26"}, n =
1,894), with data points scattered uniformly across all wind speeds from
calm conditions to 12.4 m/s. The proposed 2 m/s behavioral threshold
showed no apparent demarcation in butterfly responses, with similar
variance in cluster size changes both above and below this threshold.

Day-to-day analyses similarly revealed weak correlation between maximum
wind exposure and cluster size changes (r = 0.13, n = 96). All
observation periods in this analysis experienced maximum wind speeds
exceeding the proposed 2 m/s behavioral threshold. Despite consistent
exposure to winds above the threshold, no clear pattern emerged linking
wind intensity to subsequent roost abandonment or growth.

These null bivariate relationships indicated that wind speed alone
cannot predict monarch clustering behavior, necessitating examination of
more complex environmental interactions and conditional relationships
that may modulate wind effects.

[]{#fig:wind_bivariate_30min .anchor}![A graph of a wind speed
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image1.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Relationship between maximum wind speed and butterfly abundance change
at 30-minute intervals. Each point represents a paired observation (n =
1,894). The red dashed line indicates the proposed 2 m/s behavioral
threshold (r = 0.04).

[]{#fig:wind_bivariate_sunset .anchor}![A graph with a line graph
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image2.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Relationship between maximum wind speed and day-to-day cluster size
changes from maximum count to next sunset. Each point represents
consecutive day pairs at the same deployment (n = 96). The red dashed
line indicates the 2 m/s threshold. All 96 observations experienced
winds exceeding this threshold (r = 0.13).

### Wind Disruption [I suggest that with in this section, you repeatedly remind the reader that they are in the wind disruption, 30 minute interval portion of the analysis. This is in part to actually provide the reader with a reminder. But it is also important to put it in to key places so that you cannot be quoted out of context. I know it sounds lame, but being quoted out of context is a problem in the overwintering Monarch butterfly community, especially among community scientists. Plus, there is no harm in, reminding the reader which part of the document they are in.]{.comment-start id="30" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T15:08:00Z"}Analysis[]{.comment-end id="30"}

To examine how monarchs respond to immediate environmental conditions,
we analyzed 1,894 paired observations collected a[Just confirming that
this was your original idea.]{.comment-start id="31" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-08T18:33:00Z"}t 30-minute intervals throughout the
overwintering []{.comment-end id="31"}season. This responsive change
analysis tested whether short-term fluctuations in cluster size could be
explained by concurrent weather variables, particularly wind exposure.

#### Model Selection

We evaluated 52 candidate models using generalized additive mixed models
(GAMMs) to identify the environmental predictors of monarch abundance
changes. Model selection via Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)
identified M50 as the decisively best-fit model, capturing 85.8% of the
total model weight
(Table [\[tab:export-model-selection-table\]](#tab:export-model-selection-table)).
The next best model (M23) showed substantially weaker support with
$\Delta$AIC = 3.8 and only 12.6% model weight. Model M50 incorporated
smooth[ed?]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-09T01:33:00Z"}
terms for previous butterfly count, temperature, and time since sunrise,
along with a tensor interaction between maximum wind speed and
butterflies in direct sun.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                              AIC   $\Delta$AIC   Weight
  ------- -------------------------------------------- --------- ------------- --------
  M50     [even if these are your variable names, you    8074.03          0.00     0.86
          can call them whatever you want here to make
          it clear what the variable is. Just FYI.
          Maybe no action]{.comment-start id="36"
          author="Jenn Yost"
          date="2025-10-08T18:34:00Z"}Previous
          butterfly count, Temperature, Time since
          sunrise, Interaction (tensor): Maximum wind
          speed, Butterflies in direct
          sun[]{.comment-end id="36"}

  M23     Previous butterfly count, Temperature,         8077.86          3.83     0.13
          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since
          sunrise

  M22     Previous butterfly count, Temperature          8082.90          8.87     0.01
          (linear), Butterflies in direct sun, Time
          since sunrise

  M24     Previous butterfly count, Maximum wind         8084.05         10.02     0.01
          speed, Temperature, Butterflies in direct
          sun, Time since sunrise

M52     Temperature, Time since sunrise, Interaction   8092.72         18.69     0.00
          (tensor): Maximum wind speed, Butterflies in
          direct sun
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Top 5 models ranked by A[Since your hypothesis is about wind, it\'s
  odd that these models don\'t have wind in them.]{.comment-start
  id="34" author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-09T16:42:00Z"}[I don\' know
  how to reconcile a model with a better AIC score against a model that
  explicitly tests your hypothesis.]{.comment-start id="35"
  author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-09T16:43:00Z"}IC (30-minute
  analysis)[[]{.comment-end id="35"}]{.comment-end id="34"}

#### Analysis of Best Fit Model

The best-fit model (M50) predicted change in butterfly abundance as a
function of: (1) the previous [(either 24 hrs previous or
XXXX)]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-09T01:35:00Z"}
observation's butterfly count, (2) average temperature, (3) [do you mean
time of day?]{.comment-start id="39" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-08T18:35:00Z"}[or is this recording some other action like
count, post sunrise.]{.comment-start id="40" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-08T18:39:00Z"}[Why isn\'t wind speed in the model by
itself? why only as an interaction term?]{.comment-start id="41"
author="Jenn Yost" date="2025-10-08T18:41:00Z"}time since
sunrise[[[]{.comment-end id="41"}]{.comment-end id="40"}]{.comment-end
id="39"}, and (4)[but not the direct sunlight variable
alone?]{.comment-start id="42" author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-08T18:39:00Z"} an interaction between maximum wind gust
speed and the number of butterflies in direct sunlight.[]{.comment-end
id="42"}

Statistical analysis of the model revealed significant effects for three
of the four predictors (Table [1.1](#tab:m50_summary)). The previous
butterfly count (F = 12.50, p $<$ 0.001), time since sunrise (F = 9.85,
p $<$ 0.001), and the wind-sunlight interaction (F = 4.67, p $<$ 0.001)
all showed strong statistical significance. Temperature effects
approached but did not reach conventional significance thresholds (F =
3.19, p = 0.057). The model explained 6.4% of the variance in butterfly
abundance changes (adjusted $R^{2}$ = 0.064, n = 1894).

+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| **Smooth Term**                | **edf**           | **Ref.df**        | **F**             | **p-value**       |
+================================+:=================:+:=================:+:=================:+:=================:+
| Previous butterfly count       | 2.41              | 2.41              | 12.50             | $<$ 0.001\*\*\*   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Average temperature            | 3.68              | 3.68              | 3.19              | 0.057             |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Time since sunrise             | 4.87              | 4.87              | 9.85              | $<$ 0.001\*\*\*   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Wind gust × Sunlight exposure  | 7.35              | 7.35              | 4.67              | $<$ 0.001\*\*\*   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| *Model performance:* Adj. $R^{2}$ = 0.064, Scale est. = 4.03, n = 1894                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

: []{#tab:m50_summary .anchor}Summary of best-fit model (M50) for
predicting changes in butterfly abundance. The model uses cube-root
transformed butterfly count differences as the response variable.

Partial effects for the smooth terms are shown in
Figure [1.1](#fig:partial_effects_30min). The previous butterfly count
showed a significant non-linear negative relationship (p \< 0.001)
consistent with proportionally greater departures from larger
aggregations. Time since sunrise captured a significant diurnal pattern
(p \< 0.001) with morning departures and afternoon returns. Temperature
showed a marginally non-significant trend (p = 0.057) suggesting
possible effects near the 12.7--16°C flight threshold range.

[]{#fig:partial_effects_30min
.anchor}![](media/image3.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="1.9166666666666667in"}

[Not all readers will be able to interpret a partial effect. Consider a
revision to the caption\...\
*Partial effects on monarch butterfly abundance associated with
environmental predictor changes from the best-fit GAMM model (M50).
Shaded regions represent 95% confidence intervals*]{.comment-start
id="45" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T14:57:00Z"}[Also, there is a reference to this figure
with a figure number in the text. But the caption below the figure does
not have a reference number associated with it. In fact, it looks like
none of the figure legends/captions. Have a reference number associated
with them, even though reference numbers are used in the
text.]{.comment-start id="46" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T14:59:00Z"}Partial effects of environmental predictors
on monarch butterfly abundance changes from the best-fit GAMM model
(M50). Shaded regions represent 95% confidence intervals[[]{.comment-end
id="46"}]{.comment-end id="45"}.

The tensor interaction between wind speed and butterflies in direct sun
(p \< 0.001) revealed a complex conditional relationship where wind
effects depended on solar exposure conditions
(Figure [1.2](#fig:interaction_wind_sun)). When butterflies in direct
sun were held at zero (all butterflies in indirect light), cluster size
changes showed no consistent trend across the observed wind speed range
(0-12 m/s). Conversely, when wind was held constant, low numbers of
butterflies in direct sun were associated with decreasing cluster sizes
[across the time window]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-09T01:42:00Z"}, while higher counts led to increasing
cluster sizes [across the time window]{.insertion author="Jenn Yost"
date="2025-10-09T01:42:00Z"}. At low butterfly counts in direct sun, the
wind effect showed distinct patterns: clusters decreased in size at very
calm winds (\<1 m/s), showed no change from 1-3 m/s, and tended to
increase in size from 4-8 m/s. At moderate wind speeds (1-3 m/s) and
high butterfly counts (\>100), cluster sizes tended to decrease.
However, as wind speeds exceeded 3 m/s at these same butterfly counts,
the pattern reversed, with cluster sizes increasing. The red dashed line
at 2 m/s indicates the behavioral threshold identified in previous
analyses. Gray regions mask areas too distant from observed data points
for reliable interpretation, and caution is warranted when interpreting
the strongest partial effects at the edges of the data distribution,
where observations are sparse and interpolation artifacts may occur.
Notably, the overwhelming majority of observations occurred at very low
butterfly counts in direct sun, emphasizing that most clustering
behavior happened when few butterflies are exposed to direct sunlight.

[]{#fig:interaction_wind_sun
.anchor}![](media/image4.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind speed (m/s) and
butterflies in direct sun on cluster size changes. Color gradient
indicates partial effect magnitude (red = positive, blue = negative).
Black points show observed data distribution. Red dashed line marks the
2 m/s behavioral threshold. Gray regions indicate areas beyond reliable
interpolation range.

#### Model Diagnostics

Model diagnostic plots confirmed the adequacy of the GAMM specification
([this should be the title of the figure caption]{.comment-start id="51"
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T15:00:00Z"}Figure [1.3](#fig:model_diagnostics_30min)[]{.comment-end
id="51"}). Residual versus fitted value plots showed no systematic
patterns or heteroscedasticity, indicating appropriate model structure.
The quantile-quantile plot revealed approximately normal residual
distributions with minor deviations in the tails, [This needs a
reference. Otherwise, it just sounds like an opinion.]{.comment-start
id="52" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T15:01:00Z"}acceptable given the large sample size and
complexity of ecological data[]{.comment-end id="52"}.

[]{#fig:model_diagnostics_30min
.anchor}![](media/image5.png){width="5.25in" height="2.1875in"}

[Figure 1.3]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:02:00Z"} Diagnostic plots for the best-fit GAMM
model (M50). Left panel shows quantile-quantile plot comparing model
residuals to theoretical normal distribution. Right panel displays
residuals versus fitted values to assess homoscedasticity and model
adequacy.

Basis dimension checks confirmed adequate smoothing parameter selection
for all model terms (Table [1.2](#tab:gam_basis_check)). All smooth
functions showed k-index values near 1.0, indicating sufficient basis
dimensions to capture the underlying functional forms. None of the
smooth terms showed evidence of undersmoothing (all p-values \> 0.05),
with the possible exception of time within day which showed marginal
evidence (k-index = 0.96, p = 0.065). These diagnostics confirm that the
chosen basis dimensions adequately represent the complexity of the
smooth relationships without overfitting.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Smooth Term                                 k'    edf   k-index  p-value
  -------------------------------------- ------- ------ --------- ---------
  s(total butterflies $t_{lag}$)            9.00   2.41      1.00   0.735

  s(temperature avg)                        9.00   3.67      1.02   0.895

  s(time within day $t$)                    9.00   4.87      0.96   0.065

ti(max gust, butterflies direct sun      16.00   7.35      0.99   0.490
  $t_{lag}$)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:gam_basis_check .anchor}Basis dimension adequacy checks for
  smooth terms in best-fit GAMM model (M50). Low p-values (k-index \< 1)
  may indicate insufficient basis dimensions, particularly when edf
  approaches k'.

Temporal autocorrelation analysis revealed minimal residual correlation
structure after accounting for the AR(1) correlation within deployment
days (Figure [1.4](#fig:acf_diagnostics)). The autocorrelation function
showed rapid decay with all lags beyond lag 1 falling within the
significance bounds, confirming that the model adequately captured
temporal dependencies in the data. This indicates that our mixed-effects
structure with autoregressive errors appropriately addressed the
repeated measures nature of the time-series observations.

[]{#fig:acf_diagnostics
.anchor}![](media/image6.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="3.111111111111111in"}

Autocorrelation function of model residuals showing minimal temporal
correlation after accounting for AR(1) structure within deployment days.
Blue dashed lines indicate 95% confidence bounds for white noise.

#### [Sensitivity Analysis has a specific meaning in statistics. It is a method by which the partial effect of variables is addressed in order to determine which one has the largest contribution to the effect. I would suggest calling this the **Threshold Wind Disruption Analysis**. The second to last sentence in this paragraph should read something like - we conducted this analysis in order to be certain the wind is disruptive or not regardless of whether we consider it a continuous or binary attribute.]{.comment-start id="58" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T15:37:00Z"}Sensitivity Analysis[]{.comment-end id="58"}

To test the hypothesis that wind acts as a binary disruption threshold
rather than a continuous variable, we repeated the entire analysis using
minutes above 2 m/s as the wind predictor. This threshold-based approach
directly tests our second hypothesis that wind becomes disruptive above
the 2 m/s threshold, which, if it represents a meaningful biological
boundary, should predict declining monarch abundance at roosts
experiencing sustained winds exceeding this threshold. The best
threshold model (T50) maintained the same structure as our primary
analysis but showed notably weaker performance
(Table [1.3](#tab:threshold_model_selection)).

While T50 achieved the lowest AIC among threshold models, it failed to
decisively outperform simpler alternatives, capturing only 55.4% of
model weight compared to 40.4% for the model without any wind term
(T23). The negligible difference in AIC ($\Delta$AIC = 0.63) between
these models indicates substantial [un]{.deletion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:09:00Z"}certainty
[about whether]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:09:00Z"} [that]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:09:00Z"} the
threshold wind variable [does not substantially]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:09:00Z"}
improve[s]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:09:00Z"} predictions. Despite this weaker overall
performance (adjusted $R^{2}$ = 0.061 compared to 0.064 in the primary
analysis), the interaction term between minutes above threshold and
butterflies in direct sun achieved statistical significance (p =
0.0001), and notably, T50 was the only model among the top five
candidates to include any wind parameters. This [Are you sure you want
to use \"suggests\" and \"may\" or should you use -\
This indicates the threshold approach does not optimally characterize an
effect, and instead the wind interaction with solar exposure is what
warrants examination.]{.comment-start id="64"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T15:24:00Z"}suggests
that while the threshold approach may[]{.comment-end id="64"} not
optimally characterize wind effects, the interaction with solar exposure
warrants examination.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Terms                                              AIC   $\Delta$AIC   Weight
  ------- -------------------------------------------- --------- ------------- --------
  T50     Previous butterfly count, Temperature, Time    8077.23          0.00     0.55
          since sunrise, Interaction (tensor): Minutes
          above 2 m/s, Butterflies in direct sun

  T23     Previous butterfly count, Temperature,         8077.86          0.63     0.40
          Butterflies in direct sun, Time since
          sunrise

  T22     Previous butterfly count, Temperature          8082.90          5.67     0.03
          (linear), Butterflies in direct sun, Time
          since sunrise

  T24     Previous butterfly count, Minutes above 2      8085.41          8.18     0.01
          m/s, Temperature, Butterflies in direct sun,
          Time since sunrise

T47     Temperature, Butterflies in direct sun, Time   8097.30         20.07     0.00
          since sunrise
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:threshold_model_selection .anchor}Top 5 models ranked by AIC
  (30-minute threshold analysis)

The interaction [partial effects (?)]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:13:00Z"} plot from
the threshold analysis reveals complex conditional relationships between
wind exposure duration and solar conditions
(Figure [1.5](#fig:threshold_interaction)). When butterflies in direct
sun are held at zero (all butterflies in indirect light), cluster size
changes show no apparent trend across the entire range of wind exposure
duration, from no time above threshold to the full 30-minute observation
period. This suggests that wind effects on shaded butterflies are
minimal regardless of exposure duration.

As butterfly counts in direct sun increase, distinct patterns emerge. At
moderate counts (25-50 butterflies), cluster sizes tend to decrease when
wind exposure extends from 15 to 25 minutes above threshold. However, at
the extremes of sustained wind exposure (greater than 25 minutes),
cluster sizes tend to increase. When wind exposure is minimal (0-5
minutes above threshold), increasing butterfly counts in sun show no
effect on cluster size changes. The strongest effects appear at
intermediate wind exposure durations (15-25 minutes) combined with
moderate solar exposure levels.

The same caveats apply regarding sparse data at the extremes and the
limits of interpolation, particularly given that most observations
occurred at low butterfly counts in direct sun.

[]{#fig:threshold_interaction
.anchor}![](media/image7.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Tensor smooth interaction between minutes above 2 m/s wind threshold and
butterflies in direct sun on cluster size changes. Color gradient
indicates partial effect magnitude (red = positive, blue = negative).
Black points show observed data distribution. Gray regions indicate
areas beyond reliable interpolation range.

### Statistical Power to Detect Wind Effects

Post-hoc power analysis confirmed our study had adequate statistical
power to detect biologically meaningful wind effects
(Table [1.4](#tab:power_analysis)). With 1,894 paired observations, we
achieved 87.5% power to detect moderate effect sizes (0.15 standard
deviations) and 98.5% power to detect larger effects (0.20 standard
deviations). Power for small effects (0.10 standard deviations) was 56%,
while very small effects (0.05 standard deviations) yielded only 16.5%
power. These results indicate that our study has sufficient statistical
power for effect sizes of biological relevance.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Effect Size (SD units)       Power (Proportion) Power (%)
  ------- ------------------------- ------------------------ -------------
  0.05                         0.05                    0.165 16.5%

  0.1                          0.10                    0.560 56%

  0.15                         0.15                    0.875 87.5%

0.2                          0.20                    0.985 98.5%
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:power_analysis .anchor}Estimated power to detect wind
  effects of varying magnitudes. Effect sizes are expressed in standard
  deviations of the response variable (cube root transformed change in
  butterfly abundance).

### Site Fidelity Analysis

[I think you need a really clear and substantial transition here.\
I found it pretty easy to get lost in the weeds in the section above. I
know you talked about moving some of those results to supplemental
material. I actually don\'t think that is the answer. In the section
above, I think the answer is to keep reminding the reader as to what
section they are in. Just keep using the name of the analysis. Then,
when you move to a totally different hypothesis test, the reader should
be reminded of why the additional hypothesis is needed, and that you are
moving to that additional hypothesis test here.]{.comment-start id="72"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T15:27:00Z"}[In the
preceding section, we examine how monarchs respond to immediate
environmental conditions. But here we acknowledge that monarchs may not
be able to respond immediately to conditions.]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:21:00Z"} [For
example, if a]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:22:00Z"} [w]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:23:00Z"}[eather
variable were to have an impact when temperature was too low for
flight,]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:22:00Z"} [a monarch might respond]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:23:00Z"} [but
only]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:38:00Z"} [at the next available
opportunity.]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:23:00Z"} []{.comment-end id="72"}[This is feeling a
little bit jargony. You need some sentence that links \"day-to-day roost
dynamics\" with \"site fidelity.\" This is important, because the
changes in abundance are being interpreted as the presence of or a lack
of site fidelity. And, site fidelity is being used as a proxy for
habitat suitability.]{.comment-start id="80"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T15:45:00Z"}To test
whether cumulative weather exposure influenced day-to-day roost
dynamics,[]{.comment-end id="80"} we analyzed 96 consecutive-day pairs
from the same deployment dataset using biologically-aligned temporal
windows. The primary analysis employed a sunset window spanning from the
previous day's maximum count to the current day's last observation (mean
duration = 29.6 hours), capturing the full period from peak aggregation
through the subsequent roosting decision. A secondary analysis using
fixed 24-hour windows (n = 94 pairs) provided a [again, this is a
specific type of statistical test. You might consider using wording like
\"robustness of the results from our sunset window
analysis.\"]{.comment-start id="81" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T15:39:00Z"}sensitivity []{.comment-end id="81"}test of
our findings.

Daily maximum cluster sizes ranged from 0 to 770 butterflies (mean =
134.7 ± 138.1), with day-to-day changes in maximum count ranging from
losses of 376 butterflies to gains of 464 butterflies (mean change =
-10.5 ± 111.6). Within the sunset windows, maximum wind gusts ranged
from 2.0 to 12.8 m/s (mean = 4.5 ± 1.8 m/s), with all observation
windows exceeding the proposed 2 m/s threshold. Cumulative direct sun
exposure varied from 0 to 1,122 butterfly-observations in sunlight per
window (mean = 139.8 ± 206.9), reflecting diverse thermal exposure
conditions across monitoring days.

#### Model Selection

We evaluated 76 candidate models using generalized additive mixed models
(GAMMs) to identify environmental predictors of day-to-day changes in
maximum cluster size. The model space included null, single-predictor,
interaction-only, additive, main effects with interactions, and complex
formulations, all incorporating deployment random intercepts and AR(1)
temporal correlation. Model selection via corrected Akaike Information
Criterion (AICc) identified M32 as the decisively best-fit model,
capturing 84.7% of the total model weight
(Table [\[tab:sunset-model-selection-table\]](#tab:sunset-model-selection-table)).
The next best model (M52) showed substantially weaker support with
$\Delta$AICc = 5.6 and only 5.2% model weight. [The be]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:53:00Z"}[st
fit]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:54:00Z"} Model [(]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:54:00Z"}M32[)]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:54:00Z"}
incorporated a tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind gust and
cumulative direct sun exposure, along with baseline controls for
previous day's maximum count and window duration.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model                                Terms                                            AICc   $\Delta$AICc   Weight
  ------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------- -------- -------------- --------
  [Man\~. I think this is              Interaction (tensor): Maximum wind gust,       648.85           0.00     0.85
  weird.]{.comment-start id="87"       Cumulative butterflies in direct
  author="Jenn Yost"                   sun[[]{.comment-end id="88"}]{.comment-end
  date="2025-10-09T16:47:00Z"}[There   id="87"}
  are two things here: First you could
  say 1)what predicts roost
  abandonment? or 2) does wind effect
  roost abandonment? Two different
  questions. The model selection
  process is addressing the first
  question, not the
  second.]{.comment-start id="88"
  author="Jenn Yost"
  date="2025-10-09T16:48:00Z"}M32

  M52                                  Maximum wind gust, Cumulative butterflies in   654.45           5.60     0.05
                                       direct sun, Interaction (tensor): Maximum
                                       wind gust, Cumulative butterflies in direct
                                       sun

  M20                                  Interaction (tensor): Minimum temperature,     656.77           7.92     0.02
                                       Cumulative butterflies in direct sun

  M46                                  Maximum temperature, Cumulative butterflies    657.70           8.85     0.01
                                       in direct sun, Interaction (tensor): Maximum
                                       temperature, Cumulative butterflies in
                                       direct sun

M30                                  Interaction (tensor): Temperature at           657.90           9.06     0.01
                                       previous maximum count, Cumulative
                                       butterflies in direct sun
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Top 5 models ranked by AICc (sunset analysis)

#### Analysis of Best Fit Model

The best-fit model (M32) predicted square-root transformed change in
butterfly abundance as a function of: (1) the previous day's maximum
butterfly count, (2) window duration in hours, and (3) a tensor smooth
interaction between maximum wind gust speed and cumulative butterflies
in direct sunlight.

Statistical analysis revealed significant effects for the previous day's
maximum count [a little goofy that you have Ts here and Fs in the
table.]{.comment-start id="90" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T16:01:00Z"}(t = -4.988, p \< 0.001) and the
wind-sunlight interaction (F = 4.097, p \< 0.001), while window duration
showed no significant effect (t = -1.067[]{.comment-end id="90"}, p =
0.289) (Table [1.5](#tab:m32_summary)). The model explained 39.7% of the
variance in day-to-day cluster size changes (adjusted $R^{2}$ = 0.397, n
= 96), representing substantially greater explanatory power than the
30-minute responsive change analysis [(]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:57:00Z"}[adjusted R2
of]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:58:00Z"} [0.061 to 0.064]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T22:57:00Z"}[)]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T22:58:00Z"}.

+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| **Smooth Term**                | **edf**           | **Ref.df**        | **F**             | **p-value**       |
+================================+:=================:+:=================:+:=================:+:=================:+
| Previous day maximum count     | 1.00              | 1.00              | 24.88             | $<$ 0.001\*\*\*   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Window duration                | 1.00              | 1.00              | 1.14              | 0.289             |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Wind gust × Sunlight exposure  | 6.68              | 6.68              | 4.10              | $<$ 0.001\*\*\*   |
+--------------------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| *Model performance:* Adj. $R^{2}$ = 0.397, Scale est. = 41.06, n = 96                                          |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

: []{#tab:m32_summary .anchor}Summary of best-fit model (M32) for
predicting site fidelity. The model uses square-root transformed
day-to-day changes in butterfly count as the response variable.

The previous day's maximum count showed a significant negative linear
relationship (coefficient = -0.030, SE = 0.006), indicating that larger
clusters experienced proportionally greater losses between days. This
pattern aligns with the wind disruption analysis. Window duration showed
no significant relationship with cluster size changes. Partial effects
for these linear predictors are shown in
Figure [1.6](#fig:partial_effects_sunset).

[]{#fig:partial_effects_sunset .anchor}![A graph of different colored
lines AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image8.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.683332239720035in"}

[Same comment about partial effect:\
*Partial effects on monarch butterfly cluster size changes due to
control variables on day-to-day*]{.comment-start id="97"
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T16:03:00Z"}Partial
effects of control variables on day-to-day monarch butterfly cluster
size changes[]{.comment-end id="97"} from the best-fit GAMM model (M32).
Left panel shows the strong negative effect of previous day maximum
count. Right panel shows window duration had no significant effect on
cluster size changes. Shaded regions represent 95% confidence intervals.

The tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind gust and cumulative
direct sun exposure (p \< 0.001) revealed complex conditional
relationships between sustained weather exposure and cumulative
butterflies in direct light
(Figure [1.7](#fig:interaction_wind_sun_sunset)). All observations
during the study period experienced wind speeds exceeding 2 m/s. Under
low wind speeds around 2 m/s with minimal butterfly counts in direct
sun, clusters increased the following day, though this pattern reversed
sharply as butterfly counts [in direct sun]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:06:00Z"} increased,
resulting in decreased cluster sizes. When butterfly counts approached
zero, cluster sizes showed minimal change to slight decreases across
most wind speeds, with the exception of extreme wind values where sparse
data limits interpretation. At intermediate to high values of both wind
speed and butterfly sun exposure, [I think you need one sentence
regarding interpretation. Important to know that this is somewhat of a
closed system. It is possible some monarchs are leaving entirely, and
possible that some monarchs are entering this cluster area. If you
assume it is a closed system then they are moving from the blue part of
the figure to the red part. Please make some kind of statement along
those lines. Please don\'t leave the reader to come up with their own
interpretation. If we leave them to come up with their own
interpretation, I think we will lose a lot of readers at this
juncture]{.comment-start id="99" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T16:23:00Z"}cluster sizes increased the next
day[]{.comment-end id="99"}. Interpretation requires caution at
interpolation boundaries and regions with single observations.

[]{#fig:interaction_wind_sun_sunset .anchor}![A screenshot of a graph
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image9.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind gust (m/s) and cumulative
butterflies in direct sun on day-to-day cluster size changes. Color
gradient indicates partial effect magnitude on square-root transformed
scale (red = positive, blue = negative). Black points show observed data
distribution. Gray regions indicate areas beyond reliable interpolation
range.

#### Model Diagnostics

Model diagnostic plots confirmed the adequacy of the GAMM specification
(Figure [1.8](#fig:model_diagnostics_sunset)). Residual versus fitted
value plots showed no systematic patterns or heteroscedasticity,
indicating appropriate model structure. The quantile-quantile plot
revealed approximately normal residual distribution with minor
deviations in the tails, [please provide a reference]{.comment-start
id="102" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T16:24:00Z"}acceptable given the sample size and
complexity of ecological data[]{.comment-end id="102"}.

[]{#fig:model_diagnostics_sunset .anchor}![A graph of a graph of a graph
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image10.png){width="5.25in" height="2.1875in"}

Diagnostic plots for the best-fit GAMM model (M32). Left panel shows
quantile-quantile plot comparing model residuals to theoretical normal
distribution. Right panel displays residuals versus fitted values to
assess homoscedasticity and model adequacy.

Basis dimension checks confirmed adequate smoothing parameter selection
for the tensor smooth interaction term. The wind-sunlight interaction
showed a k-index value of 1.06 (p = 0.72), indicating sufficient basis
dimensions to capture the underlying functional form without evidence of
undersmoothing. This confirms that the chosen basis dimensions
adequately represent the complexity of the smooth relationship without
overfitting.

Temporal autocorrelation analysis revealed minimal residual correlation
structure after accounting for the AR(1) correlation within deployment
days (Figure [1.9](#fig:acf_diagnostics_sunset)). The autocorrelation
function showed rapid decay with all lags beyond lag 1 falling within
the significance bounds, confirming that the model adequately captured
temporal dependencies in the data.

[]{#fig:acf_diagnostics_sunset .anchor}![A graph with lines and numbers
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image11.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="3.111111111111111in"}

Autocorrelation function of model residuals showing minimal temporal
correlation after accounting for AR(1) structure within deployment days.
Blue dashed lines indicate 95% confidence bounds for white noise.

### [please change to something like \"robustness of analysis\"]{.comment-start id="106" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T16:25:00Z"}Sensitivity Analysis[]{.comment-end id="106"}: 24-Hour Butterfly Change

To assess the robustness of our findings, we conducted a[n]{.insertion
author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:25:00Z"}
[sensitivity]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T23:25:00Z"} analysis examining butterfly cluster
changes over 24-hour periods rather than sunset-specific intervals. This
analysis evaluated the same 72 candidate models using identical GAMM
specifications with deployment random intercepts and AR(1) temporal
correlation. Notably, model selection converged on the same structural
form as the primary sunset analysis. Model M31, incorporating a tensor
smooth interaction between maximum wind gust and cumulative direct sun
exposure, emerged as the decisively best-fit model with 50.7% of the
total model weight (Table [1.6](#tab:24hr-model-selection-table)).
Alternative models showed substantially weaker support, with the next
best model achieving only 8.4% weight and $\Delta$AICc = 3.6.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model   Description                         AICc    $\Delta$AICc   Weight    adj.
                                                                              $R^{2}$
  ------- ---------------------------------- ------- -------------- -------- ---------
  M31     Wind $\times$ sun exposure          636.3       0.0        0.507     0.235
          (smooth)

  M23     Temperature $\times$ wind (smooth)  639.9       3.6        0.084      --

  M29     Temperature $\times$ sun exposure   640.8       4.4        0.056      --
          (smooth)

  M19     Min. temp. $\times$ sun exposure    641.1       4.8        0.047      --
          (smooth)

M51     Wind + sun + wind$\times$sun        641.7       5.4        0.034      --
          (smooth)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : []{#tab:24hr-model-selection-table .anchor}Top five models from
  24-hour sensitivity analysis ranked by AICc. The best-fit model (M31)
  included a tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind gust and
  cumulative butterflies in direct sun, matching the structure
  identified in the sunset-specific analysis but applied to 24-hour
  periods.

The 24-hour analysis revealed [\"qualitatively similar interaction\"
isnt it the *[same]{.underline}* \"qualitatively interaction\" since the
\"attenuated effect magnitudes\" are quantitative?]{.comment-start
id="110" author="Francis X. Villablanca"
date="2025-10-10T16:38:00Z"}qualitatively similar
interaction[]{.comment-end id="110"} patterns to the sunset-specific
model, though with attenuated effect magnitudes reflecting the longer
temporal window (Figure [1.10](#fig:interaction_wind_sun_24hr)). Under
low wind conditions (approximately 2 m/s) with minimal butterflies in
direct sun, clusters increased over the subsequent 24 hours. This effect
reversed sharply as butterfly counts increased under low winds,
resulting in rapid cluster size decreases. When no butterflies occupied
direct sun positions, cluster sizes remained relatively stable across
wind speed values. Intermediate values for both wind speed and sun
exposure produced cluster size increases. The convergent model selection
and consistent interaction patterns across temporal scales strengthen
confidence in the identified environmental relationships, while
interpretation requires similar caution near data boundaries and regions
with sparse observations.

[]{#fig:interaction_wind_sun_24hr .anchor}![A diagram of a wind speed
AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](media/image12.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="4.0in"}

Tensor smooth interaction between maximum wind gust (m/s) and cumulative
butterflies in direct sun on 24-hour cluster size changes. Color
gradient indicates partial effect magnitude on square-root transformed
scale (red = positive, blue = negative). Black points show observed data
distribution. Gray regions indicate areas beyond reliable interpolation
range. The interaction pattern mirrors that observed in the
sunset-specific analysis, supporting the robustness of identified
environmental relationships.

# [[\@Francis X. Villablanca](mailto:fvillabl@calpoly.edu) [\@Jenn Yost](mailto:jyost@calpoly.edu) Updated discussion to match new analysis.]{.comment-start id="113" author="Kyle Nessen" date="2025-10-10T13:18:00Z"}Discussion[]{.comment-end id="113"}

Our study provides the first direct empirical test of the long-standing hypothesis that wind disrupts overwintering monarch butterfly clusters. For over three decades, conservation practice has operated under the assumption that wind speeds exceeding 2 m/s force butterflies to abandon their roosts, either by physically dislodging them or triggering behavioral departures (Kingston L. H. Leong 2016). Our findings challenge this fundamental assumption[.]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:02:00Z"} [T]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:03:00Z"}[hough there does appear to be a "wind effect]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:33:00Z"}[,]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:04:00Z"}[" it is not]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:33:00Z"} [at 2 m/s nor]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:03:00Z"} [the only effect.]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:33:00Z"} [and]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:33:00Z"} [and i]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:03:00Z"}[nstead, o]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:02:00Z"}[ur results]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T23:33:00Z"} suggest a more complex relationship between monarchs and their overwintering [I know this sentence is a little clunky. I rewrote it so that we could not be quoted out of context.]{.comment-start id="127" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:05:00Z"}environment[]{.comment-end id="127"}.

## Evidence Against Wind Disruption

The evidence against the wind disruption hypothesis emerges from multiple, independent lines of analysis. Most strikingly, every single observation period in our day-to-day analysis experienced maximum wind speeds exceeding the proposed 2 m/s threshold (range: 2.0--12.8 m/s), yet monarch clusters persisted throughout the 78-day study period. If the hypothesis were correct, we should have observed either mass departures when temperatures permitted flight or butterflies physically dislodged and littering the ground when too cold to fly, as described in the literature (K. L. H. Leong 1999). We observed neither.

[I think you should take this sentence out of here, and make it the introductory sentence to the next paragraph. That next paragraph should very briefly summarize results of the bivariate analysis. Even just indicating that the two factors interact, and that wind does not defined the interaction entirely. See the next comment\...]{.comment-start id="129" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:10:00Z"}Our bivariate analyses provide additional refutation. []{.comment-end id="129"}When we examined the simple relationship between wind speed and cluster size changes, we found essentially no correlation at either temporal scale (30-minute r = 0.04, n = 1,894; day-to-day r = 0.13, n = 96). These analyses tested the most basic prediction of the hypothesis that increasing wind speed should produce decreasing cluster sizes. The absence of this relationship across wind speeds ranging from calm conditions to six times the proposed threshold suggests that wind alone does not drive clustering decisions.

Statistical power was not a limitation. Our analysis achieved 87.5% power to detect moderate effects and 98.5% power for large effects. The wind disruption hypothesis predicts substantial, observable impacts, not subtle statistical signals. Our failure to detect these effects, despite adequate power and validated methodology that successfully identified other environmental signals, provides strong evidence against the hypothesis rather than merely absence of evidence.

## Thermoregulation as an Alternative Explanation

[This could probably be moved into the new paragraph just above]{.comment-start id="132" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:11:00Z"}While wind alone showed no disruptive effect, our models revealed that monarchs respond to environmental conditions through complex interactions, particularly between wind and solar exposure. []{.comment-end id="132"}[]{.paragraph-insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:12:00Z"}

Th[e]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:12:00Z"}[is]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:12:00Z"} interaction [between wind and solar exposure]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:12:00Z"} emerged as the dominant environmental signal in both temporal [I suggest using the R squared since it is widely, regarded as a correlation coefficient]{.comment-start id="136" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-10T16:40:00Z"}analyses []{.comment-end id="136"}(30-minute F = 4.67, p \< 0.001; day-to-day F = 4.10, p \< 0.001), suggesting that the relationship between wind and monarch behavior depends critically on light conditions.

The interpretation of these wind-light interactions requires careful consideration. During our study, butterflies rarely experienced direct sunlight, with most observations recording few or no butterflies in sun. This natural behavioral pattern meant that our models extrapolated interaction effects into data-sparse regions, particularly at high sun exposure values where fewer than 3% of observations occurred. The patterns we describe therefore reflect a combination of robust findings in data-rich conditions (primarily shaded butterflies) and model predictions in less-observed states [(that reflected a different dynamic)]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:13:00Z"}.

The clearest finding emerges from our most common condition: when butterflies remained in shade, wind speed had no effect on cluster dynamics across the entire observed range (0 to 12.4 m/s). This pattern was consistent across both our 30-minute and [Call it \"sunset\" throughout and replace the day-to-day in the text.]{.comment-start id="138" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:14:00Z"}sunset []{.comment-end id="138"}analyses[, with o]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:15:00Z"}[.O]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:15:00Z"}nly the most extreme observations in the sunset analysis[state what that observation is - otherwise it may not be clear what you are referring to.]{.comment-start id="141" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:16:00Z"} []{.comment-end id="141"}showing any deviation, directly [contradicts]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:15:00Z"} []{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:19:00Z"}[contradicting]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:15:00Z"} the wind disruption hypothesis. The interaction patterns at higher sun exposure, while statistically significant, [explain the basis off this comment - why do you conclude this. Otherwise it may not be clear what you are referring to.]{.comment-start id="145" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:18:00Z"}derive largely from model interpolation[]{.comment-end id="145"}. Intriguingly, the 30-minute and sunset analyses suggested [State with these different patterns were. Otherwise it may not be clear what you are referring to.]{.comment-start id="146" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:19:00Z"}different directional effects[]{.comment-end id="146"} under similar wind-sun combinations, potentially reflecting distinct behavioral responses operating at immediate versus day-to-day temporal scales.

These patterns suggest thermoregulation as a plausible mechanism. [The preceding paragraph should provide the statements that would be supportive of this conclusion. Essentially, provide more support before you state this.\
I am not at all disagreeing. I just want it to be crystal clear why this is likely the case.]{.comment-start id="147" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:20:00Z"}Monarchs appear to both seek and avoid sunny locations depending on their thermal state[]{.comment-end id="147"}. Masters, Malcolm, and Brower (1988) demonstrated that cold monarchs actively seek [Split sentence to avoid a run-on-ish sentence, and to call out \"seek\"\
Other word smithing in the paragraph is to emphasize the seek and avoid depending on thermal state.]{.comment-start id="148" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:23:00Z"}sun[]{.comment-end id="148"}[. The seeking allows]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:22:00Z"}[,]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:22:00Z"} warming from below flight threshold (12.7°C) to well above it within one minute through solar basking at ambient temperatures as low as 9°C. This represents an energetic advantage over the alternative warming mechanism, as Kammer (1970) showed that shivering requires 25 to 31 times more energy than resting. However, Masters, Malcolm, and Brower (1988) also found that monarchs [avoid sun]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:24:00Z"} [when thoracic temperatures approach 30°C]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:29:00Z"}[.]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:24:00Z"} [Monarchs]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:27:00Z"} depart sunny clusters [when thoracic temperatures approach 30°C]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:29:00Z"}, [and]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:27:00Z"} adopt[ing]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:27:00Z"} sun-minimizing postures [delete - same as depart sunny clusters]{.comment-start id="158" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:28:00Z"}or flying away[]{.comment-end id="158"} to avoid overheating and excessive lipid depletion.

The model-predicted increases in cluster size at intermediate wind and sun levels could reflect a thermoregulatory balance where wind moderates the heating effects of solar exposure. Masters, Malcolm, and Brower (1988) observed that monarchs dissipate heat while gliding through airflow across their bodies. Similarly, environmental wind could provide passive convective cooling, as described by [this would be a great citation to have an introduction, and also to use here]{.comment-start id="159" author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T13:32:00Z"}Riddell and Porter (2025), who found that wind-driven convective cooling interacts strongly with solar radiation effects in terrestrial organisms. []{.comment-end id="159"}This cooling mechanism might allow butterflies to remain in sunny locations longer than they otherwise would, with wind offsetting some of the solar heat gain that would typically trigger departure. In contrast, shaded butterflies experience no solar heat gain, making wind-driven cooling unnecessary and potentially explaining the absence of wind effects in shade. However, the contrasting patterns between our immediate (30-minute) and daily (sunset) temporal scales suggest that multiple behavioral mechanisms may operate simultaneously, [and]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:33:00Z"} [while]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:33:00Z"} other explanations could [also]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:33:00Z"} produce these statistical patterns. Rather than attempting to definitively resolve these mechanisms with limited data from [rare]{.deletion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:33:00Z"} [specific]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:33:00Z"} conditions, our findings point toward the importance of light exposure as a driver of butterfly behavior, warranting focused investigation of how canopy structure and resulting light regimes influence cluster dynamics.

Additional observations align with thermal management. Time since sunrise revealed strong diurnal patterns (30-minute F = 9.85, p \< 0.001), with butterflies departing clusters in late morning and early afternoon, then reforming aggregations later in the day. This pattern persisted after controlling for temperature and sunlight, potentially reflecting endogenous circadian rhythms, though it also aligns with predictable daily thermal cycles. The midday dispersal may reflect routine activities such as patrolling flights or nectaring. Monarchs have been observed gliding during these dispersal periods, which could facilitate thermoregulatory cooling while accomplishing other essential behaviors. Our study could not follow individual butterflies once they departed cluster locations, so these activities remain speculative. Similar temporal patterns have been consistently documented at California overwintering sites (Tuskes and Brower 1978; Chaplin and Wells 1982), and the Xerces Society's standardized monitoring protocols explicitly restrict counting to specific time windows to account for these diurnal movements (Xerces Society 2017).

Our models explained 6.4% of variance in 30-minute cluster changes and 39.7% of variance in day-to-day roost fidelity. The environmental factors that did explain variance were predominantly thermal in nature: the wind-light interaction, direct sunlight exposure, and diurnal patterns of dispersal and aggregation. While substantial variation remains unexplained, the environmental signals we detected suggest thermal factors may play a more important role than wind avoidance in organizing clustering behavior. Without direct body temperature measurements under varying environmental conditions, thermoregulation remains one plausible interpretation among potentially others, and further research is needed to confirm the underlying mechanisms.

## Limitations and Context

Several factors shape the interpretation of our findings. First, our data come from a single overwintering season (2023--2024) when monarch populations were relatively typical (Xerces Society 2025a). The following season saw near-complete absence of monarchs at our study sites, coinciding with the second-lowest overwintering population on record (Xerces Society 2025b). This dramatic population crash prevented temporal replication but underscores the urgency of understanding overwintering ecology with the data we have.

Second, our study observed relatively small clusters where butterflies maintained direct contact with eucalyptus substrates. The wind disruption hypothesis was developed during an era of massive aggregations containing hundreds of thousands of individuals, where many butterflies attached only to other butterflies in multi-layered formations (Kingston. L. H. Leong 1990; L. P. Brower et al. 2008). If substrate attachment provides greater wind resistance than butterfly-to-butterfly attachment, wind might affect these different clustering configurations differently. The hypothesis may have been accurate for the extreme densities of past decades but less relevant to today's smaller populations.

Finally, our models explained relatively little variance overall (30-minute 6.4%; day-to-day 39.7%), reflecting both the complexity of butterfly behavior and our focus on testing specific hypotheses rather than comprehensively explaining movement patterns. However, the strong signals we did detect and our adequate statistical power give confidence in our main conclusion that wind alone does not disrupt monarch clusters as previously believed.

## Implications for Conservation

Our findings suggest that wind protection, long considered a limiting environmental factor in overwintering monarch conservation, may constrain habitat suitability far less than previously believed. This realization carries important implications for how we understand, manage, and restore overwintering sites.

### Expanded Habitat Availability and Population Limitations

The absence of wind disruption despite frequent threshold exceedances indicates that suitable habitat within existing groves may be more extensive than currently recognized. Areas previously dismissed due to wind exposure might support clusters if they provide appropriate thermal and light conditions. With western monarch populations at historically low levels, this raises an important question: are we observing limited suitable habitat, or limited butterflies to occupy potentially suitable space? At historical abundances, monarchs may have utilized far more locations within groves than currently expressed. The small clusters we documented may represent only a fraction of available habitat, with suitable but unoccupied areas going unrecognized simply because too few butterflies exist to reveal these possibilities.

### Simplified Management Requirements

Previous management frameworks required protecting extensive buffer zones around clustering sites. For example, Althouse & Meade, Inc. and Creekside Science (2023) recommended maintaining trees up to six tree heights from clustering locations to ensure adequate wind protection. For mature eucalyptus reaching 40 meters, this translates to protecting all trees within approximately 240 meters, creating substantial complexity in coastal California where overwintering sites often involve diverse stakeholders and contentious land use decisions.

If wind protection plays a less critical role than assumed, these extensive buffer requirements may no longer be necessary. Trees distant from core groves, previously considered essential for wind breaks, may contribute far less than previously thought. This simplification focuses conservation efforts more precisely on immediate grove structure rather than attempting to control wind patterns across vast surrounding areas.

However, a precautionary approach remains warranted. Where buffer trees exist as healthy, mature specimens, maintaining them represents prudent hedging against incomplete understanding. This temporal asymmetry, where removing trees or modifying canopy structure is always possible while accelerating large tree growth is not, argues for maintaining existing trees wherever possible. Previous recommendations to plant trees, maintain them for longevity, and develop succession plans remain entirely valid, even if the mechanistic understanding of why these practices work requires updating.

### Proactive Habitat Creation Through Canopy Management

If monarchs respond primarily to light and thermal patterns rather than strict wind thresholds, strategic canopy modification may create new overwintering habitat. The wind protection framework offered little beyond planting trees and waiting decades for maturation. Light-based management might enable shorter-timeframe interventions.

Real-world examples support this possibility. At Monarch Lane in Los Osos, strategic canopy opening resulted in monarchs appearing and persisting (K. L. H. Leong 1999; Xerces Society 2025a). At Andrew Molera State Park in Big Sur, clearing an overgrown grove increased butterfly counts from zero to over one thousand (E. Pelton, personal communication). Conversely, tree planting at Pacific Grove required approximately 15 years of canopy maturation before monarchs returned (S. Weiss, personal communication). These patterns suggest that appropriate canopy structure, including carefully designed openings creating dappled light, can attract butterflies far more quickly than waiting for tree growth alone.

Unidentified eucalyptus stands or overly dense groves might thus be converted to functional habitat through selective thinning. However, additional research is needed before implementing large-scale canopy modifications, particularly at established overwintering sites. Rather than passive waiting, managers might proactively create suitable conditions by strategically opening existing canopies at appropriate locations, representing a significant departure from previous approaches focused almost entirely on wind protection and tree growth.

### Long-term Optimism Despite Current Uncertainty

While this study reduces certainty regarding some aspects of overwintering ecology, the long-term trajectory points toward management practices that may be simpler to implement, [are]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:42:00Z"} grounded in empirical evidence, and potentially [are]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:42:00Z"} [outright]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:47:00Z"} [effective instead of simply]{.insertion author="Francis X. Villablanca" date="2025-10-12T20:42:00Z"} more effective. The strict 2 m/s threshold created an overly constraining understanding of habitat requirements, suggesting suitable sites were overly limited. Our results indicate monarchs may be more resilient to environmental variation than previously believed, potentially revealing more opportunities for habitat creation and maintenance.

The fundamental conservation tools remain unchanged: maintaining existing groves, planting and managing trees for longevity, and developing succession plans for aging forests. But we may now recognize more locations where habitat might be suitable and fewer absolute constraints on where sites can be maintained or created. As Saniee and Villablanca (2022) suggest, managing canopy structure to create appropriate light patterns and temperature gradients may prove more important than achieving specific wind speed thresholds. This perspective aligns with our finding that interactions between environmental factors, rather than single variables in isolation, shape clustering behavior.

Conservation efforts should continue protecting forest structure at overwintering sites while research clarifies the specific environmental factors, particularly light patterns and thermal regimes, that monarchs select for when choosing roost locations.

## Future Research Directions

Our findings open several important avenues for future research. While the wind-light interaction we observed suggests complex relationships between environmental factors and clustering behavior, the strong effect of light exposure itself points toward canopy structure as a potentially primary driver of habitat selection. This conclusion finds support in Saniee and Villablanca (2022), who found that while temperature and humidity failed to support the microclimate hypothesis at aggregation locations, solar radiation was one of the few environmental factors that distinguished occupied sites from other grove locations. Similarly, Stuart B. Weiss et al. (1991) found that successful overwintering sites maintain consistent canopy openness around 20%, while unsuccessful sites show greater variability. Combined with our findings, this suggests that predictable light patterns created by canopy structure may provide a stable, reliable environmental cue that monarchs can consistently locate and respond to year after year. Unlike weather conditions that fluctuate unpredictably, the spatial pattern of light created by canopy architecture remains relatively constant across seasons, offering a dependable signal for site selection. Monarchs possess sophisticated visual systems that enable sun compass navigation during migration (Nguyen et al. 2021; Mouritsen and Frost 2002), capabilities that would allow them to detect and respond to consistent light patterns within groves. Future research should prioritize characterizing canopy structure and the resulting light regimes at both occupied and unoccupied sites to determine whether specific light patterns predict roost site selection and fidelity.

Beyond environmental factors, social dynamics may explain additional variation in our models. The strong effect of previous butterfly count on subsequent changes suggests that monarchs do not distribute randomly within groves but rather exhibit overdispersed clustering patterns where the presence of butterflies attracts others. This positive feedback mechanism, where initial settlement increases the probability of others joining, could create self-reinforcing aggregation patterns independent of immediate environmental conditions (Berdahl et al. 2013).

Finally, testing these patterns across the broader overwintering range would establish their generality. Sites with different tree species, latitudes, and especially population densities could reveal whether wind responses vary with clustering configuration or if our findings represent fundamental aspects of monarch overwintering behavior.

## Conclusions

Our direct test of the wind disruption hypothesis found no evidence that wind speeds above 2 m/s force monarchs to abandon their clusters. Every observation in our day-to-day analysis exceeded this threshold, yet clusters persisted. Bivariate analyses showed no relationship between wind and cluster changes. Model selection consistently identified other factors as more important. These multiple lines of evidence converge on a clear conclusion. Wind alone does not disrupt overwintering monarch butterflies as has been assumed for over three decades.

Instead, our results suggest that thermal factors may play a more important role in clustering dynamics than previously recognized. Monarchs responded strongly to direct sunlight and diurnal patterns, both factors that could influence body temperature. The unexpected wind-light interaction, where moderate wind combined with sun exposure sometimes increased cluster sizes, suggests that environmental conditions interact in complex ways that simple threshold-based management approaches cannot capture.

These findings arrive at a critical moment for monarch conservation. With western populations at historic lows, every assumption about habitat requirements deserves scrutiny. While questions remain about the precise mechanisms, our findings demonstrate that current management guidelines based on wind speed thresholds are not supported by empirical evidence. Moving forward, conservation efforts should prioritize maintaining existing overwintering groves while additional research clarifies what environmental factors monarchs select for when choosing roost sites. As we face the challenge of preserving overwintering habitat for a declining population, evidence-based understanding of monarch ecology becomes not just scientifically important, but essential for preserving the remarkable phenomenon of monarch migration in western North America.
