Many species demonstrate specific habitat associations and are known to select habitat components at different spatial and temporal scales (Johnson 1980, Wiens 1989, Mayor et al. 2009). Migratory species, in particular, are expected to demonstrate habitat selection at multiple scales (Hutto 1985, Kristan 2006). Habitat selection - implying choice - is typically quantified as a disproportionate use relative to availability (Mayor et al. 2009), or as use (occupancy) and non-use (MacKenzie et al. 2017) of particular habitat elements. While recognizing that use at a specific scale does not equate with selection at that exact scale, explicit methodologies are being developed to directly quantify the hierarchical nature of habitat selection (e.g.: Bellamy et al. 2020) given that the scale of selection is not always intuitive (Mayor et al. 2009). In addition, relevant habitat attributes, such as those under selection, can themselves be structured in hierarchical or non-hierarchical fashions (Kristan 2006). Hierarchical meaning that one attribute (and its choice) is dependent on the pre-existence of another attribute (e.g.: slow moving riverine system dependent on low topographical relief), and that habitat selection is based on threshold models, resulting in patterns of use and nonuse or presence-absence (Kristan 2006). Non-hierarchical meaning that attributes are correlated (e.g.: solar radiation and temperature) and potentially non-intuitive or non-generalizable across scales (Mayor et al 2009), and that selection may be expressed as relational, or as a gradient of use (Kristan 2006), rather than use and nonuse. For example, a migratory organism might show a hierarchical spatial selection process, where selection of specific roosting groves would be dependent on pre-existing selection of specific migratory routes (Hutto 1985). After selecting a grove, a migratory organism might show non-hierarchical selection of roost locations constrained to a gradient of conditions within the grove. Furthermore, species can show habitat selection that is variable across temporal scales, even where temporal variation is more important than spatial variation (Weins 1989, Fahrig 1992, Mayor et al. 2009). For example, over the course of time, be it hours or days, selection could shift if the attributes under selection change, or as a function of nonlinear interactions between variables over time (Mayor et al. 2009).

When a species is shown to express specific habitat affinities and those affinities or preferences are not contextualized in space and time, then the scale of the affinity has not been addressed. If the scale has not been addressed, then even when habitat selection has been documented, it is not clear at what scale habitat selection is occurring. Selection at different scales could be confounded into a single spatially/temporally non-explicit scale. In this case the interaction of both selection and scale is obscured (Mayor et al. 2009, MacKenzie et al. 2017, Bellamy et al. 2020). Likewise, selection at a single scale might be confounded if commingled with selection that occurs at additional scale(s) (Johnson 1980). Both forms of confounding selection and scale would have the effect of adding error to an analysis, not because the variable is inherently noisy or random, but because variance would not be appropriately partitioned in space and time. Inappropriate partitioning can muddy interpretations of realized niche, while potentially misdirecting management and restoration to an incorrect scale.

One example of a species with specific habitat affinities is the monarch butterfly, or more specifically, the overwintering North American monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus). The North American population is known to overwinter in groves of trees in geographically predictable locations (Urquhart and Urquhart 1978, Brower 1995, Brower and Missrie 1999, Martinez-Mendez et al. 2016, Ortiz-Bibian et al. 2017, Fisher et al. 2018). These groves occur in the highlands of central Mexico and along the coastline of California. Thus, on a continental scale, the specific migratory route (Brower 1995, Pile 2014, Urquhart et al. 1970, Billings 2019) used by a monarch butterfly would define which of these two locations it would ultimately encounter. Subsequent habitat selection could only occur predicated on pre-existing selection of a migratory route, resulting in habitat choices being available either in the highlands of Mexico, where monarch butterflies shown disproportionately selection of Oyamel fir forests (Brower 1995), or within mixed tree-species groves in coastal California (Griffiths and Villablanca 2015). Thus, specific habitat affinities are only expressed in one spatial context or the other, suggesting alternative realized niches, and hierarchical spatial selection.

The overwintering habitat of western overwintering monarch butterflies has been extensively studied, but not in an explicitly spatial or temporal context. For example, temperature, relative humidity, and solar radiation are thought to be important to overwintering monarch butterflies (Leong et al. 1991, 2004) as these habitat attributes appear to be selected within groves. But, using the conditions of these same attributes outside of groves, Fisher et al. (2018) find the spatial probability of an occupied overwintering grove can be reliably predicted for any location in the California landscape. This means habitat selection could be occurring relative to habitat attributes within and outside of groves, or that attributes grade across the grove edge to the interior, or even from the surrounding landscape to the edge to the interior. Leong et al. (2004) report that monarchs "choose groves that face south/west near the ocean and north/east near bays and inlets," and Lane (1993) concludes that overwintering sites are located in shallow canyons and gullies, or on the leeward side of hills. If these statements are correct, then habitat attributes outside of groves are under selection since they define the condition of the entire grove. Habitat use by overwintering monarch butterflies also shows habitat selection at various temporal scale, ranging from the use of individual trees for a month or more (Anderson and Brower 1996), to the use of individual trees or branches for a few days or hours (Frey and Leong 1993, Leong et al. 1991, Weiss et al. 1991). In addition, Fisher et al. (2018) consider whether the habitat attributes thought to be under selection (Leong et al. 1991, 2004) are important for the duration of the five to six month overwintering season, or if attributes are more important in certain months, and they conclude the latter.

So even though overwintering western monarch butterfly habitat selection appears to show a spatial and a temporal context, it has not been studied in an explicitly spatial or temporal framework. We regard selection of overwintering habitat by western monarch butterflies as a case where selection at different scales could be confounded into a single spatially/temporally non-explicit scale such that attribute variability at different spatial scales is not considered and therefore the scale at which selection occurs is not known. This confounding can keep us from understanding the overwintering habitat attributes under selection, and potentially lead to flawed habitat conservation and management. For example, if temperature varies at a landscape level, but is thought to be under selection within overwintering groves, then more shade plants might be planted to reduce the temperature within a grove, but would only succeed in doing so for some increment relative to the landscape level variation.

Indeed, the hypothesis that habitat selection by overwintering western monarch butterflies could be occurring at multiple spatial scales has never been explicitly tested. Therefore, we present an analysis focused on spatial non-hierarchical variation within groves (wherein selection may be expressed as relational or gradients of use), and hierarchical variation between groves (wherein selection could be predicated on location, Kristan 2006). We analyze attributes that have been proposed to be important to habitat selection by overwintering monarch butterflies in Coastal California (Leong et al. 1991, 2004, Weiss et al. 1991, Anderson and Brower 1996). We test whether these attributes provide evidence that habitat selection is occurring, whether habitat selection is uniform across space (the among grove scales), whether habitat selection correlates with position in the landscape (the latitudinal scale), and whether the variables correlate with each other. In addition, temporal variation and associated attribute selection are currently inferred to occur (Anderson and Brower 1996), Frey and Leong 1993, Leong et al. 1991, Weiss et al 1991, Fisher et al. 2018) therefore by sampling over the overwintering season we consider temporal variation at a larger scale. Our intent is not to elucidate spatial and temporal hierarchical and non-hierarchical patterns. Instead, we test whether, in addition to the temporal habitat selection that is inferred to occur, the patterns of variation and inferred selection provide evidence of a spatial components to habitat selection. In the end, we hope to conclude whether it is or is not necessary to address microhabitat variation and selection over space and time.