## Transcript Text

Okay, this is another attempt at uh, outlining my introduction. So the beginning is while, uh, the biotic and abiotic factors influence the distribution survival of invertebrate species. And then I think in a one sentence we can address bionic factors which include um, all those papers that I like already researched. Like competition, predation, commensalism. Yeah, I went and I collected a bunch of those so I could say, well, biotic conditions are influenced by these. Some transition to abiotic factors. Have a transition to abiotic conditions often limit invertebrate species like where they can live, what they can do, all that sorts of stuff. Then uh, begin to talk about how things like temperature can be very limiting or influential to invertebrate species. Relative humidity, solar radiation, talk about freezing temperatures, uh, precipitation, what else? It m. Um, yeah, consider all the things that people think about insulation. Maybe you know, a lot of these early 80s papers about Mexico overwintering monarchs focus on the forest canopy and I don't know, is that like a biotic factor? Kind of weird because it's um. Because presumably the monarchs are focuses on um, forest structure and how that creates more favorable environmental conditions. Um, but the butterflies are just, they're not getting any energy from it. Maybe there's a sentence in there to say like and other organisms can create, can modify the local abiotic conditions. Uh, with this idea that fir trees or eucalyptus trees are moderating temperatures, moderating wind, moderating light exposure, say moderating force. It brings uh, each extreme in. So colder temperatures become less cold, hotter temperatures become less hot. It. I think that's a good sentence soon cleared because that's really important part of the microclimate hypothesis. Okay. And then. Yeah, okay, I think I like this. So the, you make this case. Abiotic conditions are really important in explaining the behavior and adaptations of inverted species. Where you might find them, where you won't find them, um, all that sort of stuff. I think that's really good. Then once you've established that, then you can talk about. Monarch butterflies are a particularly interesting example, uh, interesting organism to look at this phenomenon as a study organism. There's your transition to monarchs. You can then spend some time describing the remarkable life history of monarch butterflies, particularly uh, their annual migration. Come here. Come on. It's mhm. Oh, come on. Come on. So, um. Hey, come on. Uh, gosh. Okay, so you say monarchs are a great organism to look at this phenomenon because they have a complex life history cycle and this um, additionally like annual migration. Right. Where ah, all of the things that we introduced before have some contribution demonic biology. Come on. It. Mhm. Um, yeah, there's like a lot to expand here. But uh, uh, this section of the introduction should address the. The individual life history of the monarch butterfly, going from caterpillar to butterfly. And then also the more macro scale annual migration which addresses breeding and overwintering phases. Uh, I suppose to begin you can start small, discuss uh, how things like temperature influences development rates of the individual. Probably look for other sources, how individuals are uh, influenced by factors you should work in somewhere. This transition from a regular monarch to a super monarch where gene expression is changed and um, you know, the expression of the juvenile hormone changes due to changing temperature, in part due to temperature changing votive period like short, shorter days to create a monarch that is much larger and lives much longer. To participate in this overwintering phenomenon, that's like a nice transition to discussing overwintering as part of this overview of the monarch story. But before that you need to spend some time about how maybe like the individual and the breeding phase kind of co. Mingle, uh, to describe this general life history of butterflies reproducing as fast as possible and you know, what they can tolerate, what they can't. Okay. Obviously I'm kind of shaky on that part of it, but I don't think it has to be super long. I just need to adequately explain that Monarch butterflies are for a good chunk of the year reproducing very quickly and uh, have abiotic constraints on them. Come on. Then we get to the overwintering stuff and talk about how first of all why they do it. Yeah, because they uh, the overwinter. Because the abiotic conditions change in most of their civil habitat. This essential resource, milkweed, which I should have talked about. It's um, depth, you know, as part of their breeding history, the breeding phase of their life history. I think I should also include just not very long. But uh, milkweed itself confers um, it's like chemical protection which is cool. Just like an interesting aside and a little padding for my introduction. Yeah. Overwintering phenomenon is necessary because much of uh, North America become unsuitable. You know, there's persistent freezing temperatures which they cannot tolerate and milkweed disappears from the landscape. Come on. So that leads to the overwintering phenomenon. This, you spend some time introducing it. Where monarchs in the east go to the mountains of Mexico where they can form in the tens of millions in a relatively small area of uh, forested fur Oyamo forest. And they come to the coast of California where they primarily Overwinter in the overwintern eclipse of scrub or whatever. And then you could then talk about the quote goals of overwintering or the constraints uh, or challenges of winter butterflies have which is um, to persist long enough with sufficient lipid reserves to restart the breeding cycle in to order North America uh, while avoiding things like predation, freezing temperatures, terrible storms. Come on, come on it uh, okay. So once you establish kind of the challenges then you can start to talk about the early work. Mhm. Work particularly around how temperature structure provide benefit to mimic butterflies. Then you can transition to the development of the microclimate hypothesis in California, mostly focusing on Kingston Leong, definitely establishing his understanding right. That things like light and wind are very important. Stu's understanding that structure seems to be important. Continue to build that um, and then ultimately challenge the microclimate hypothesis. San Eats work the fisher's work describing that there this small window, it's probably less or like it's fuzzier than we give it credit. Then end that paragraph by saying that Sani and Villamarcha were unable to address the imports of wind in cleft bearing selection site. And no direct empirical test has been conducted up to this point. Now we can get into a topic of conservation. Obligatory discussions of how monarchs are critically imperiled. They're not doing well, threatened, blah blah blah. Spend some time developing this idea that it's, it's difficult to conserve the full range of monarch habitat which is North America, which is like a lot of North America. But managing overwintering groves which are this vanishingly small percentage of uh, the total habitat has this outsized effect. Hey, okay, uh, I lost my train of thought but oh, conservation. So yeah, establish butterflies are in decline. Quasi extinction event. The Schultz 2017 paper. Blah blah blah blah blah. Talk about the difficulty of managing all of uh, the habitat range for monarch butterflies. But uh, overwintering groves represent this very small percentage. I need to calculate what that percentage is. But it's basically North America versus the California groves plus the Mexican groves which is comparably very small. Uh, you can say in California ah, like over half of known overwintering sites occur on state park property which is a helpful conservation partner uh in this effort. But um, you know most of our groves have been in decline. They're not doing well. And so much of the conservation focus in the conservation focus in the monarch world has been at least in the west coast has been on uh managing these overwintering drops because they can be managed and they can have this outsized role in the population Numbers of monarch butterflies, like a single female, can lay hundreds of eggs. Each generation offers the opportunity to multiply the population by hundreds times, you know, and creating, or maintaining and potentially creating suitable overwintering habitat, uh, so that more monarchs can persist during this time of the year where they are unable to reproduce gives the best chance of success for the following year. You know, more numbers that begin at the breeding season, the more potential there is and the more buffer and the more um, allowance for inevitable negative effects when they enter the world and begin breeding where they face their own different challenges. But at least here we can help conserve them and also count them. You know, this is how we get our best numbers of how the populations are doing is during this overwintering phase. So they're very important. And so a lot of the focus, a lot of the energy around conservation has really zeroed in on um, this microclimate hypothesis because that is, um, how we understand what is suitable habitat and what is not. And how do we make decisions about groves, um, like what tree, where should trees be planted, Can a tree be removed? Like these sorts of questions are very much informed by the microclimate hypothesis with special attention to wind. Okay, special attention to wind. And then I can cite several studies, Pacific Grove, potentially, um, Pismo and Elwood, as sites where considerable effort and analysis was done to understand the wind dynamics within the grove. And decisions were made around that based a lot on Kingston Leong's disruptive wind hypothesis. So yeah, somewhere in there I need to spend more time developing the wind hypothesis, explicitly tell um, a narrative about it where probably at the end of the microclimate hypothesis discussion and before the conservation discussion and give a, a walkthrough of how Kingston Leong like kind of really break it down. First identifies the pattern in 1990, reinforces his finding in 1991. I think in 1999 he like, does his OSOS manipulation where he credits like wind protection as why it's partly suitable. 2004, he makes some more claims about wind protection. And then in 2016 in uh, his guide for managers, he makes very strong claims about the wind hypothesis and the disruptive wind hypothesis. And then I can end that sentence with this. Science has been incorporated in several best management practices like Xerxes and wafwa, and then transition to the conservation question and why we care about conservation, which I just outlined. Then once we get through the conservation, then I can talk about um, you know, or I can end the conversation, the conservation paragraph, uh, or discussion with um, you know, lots of resources are being spent. But the wind hypothesis, the disruptive wind hypothesis, has never been empirically tested and it is taken as a putative mechanism. But with declining groves and monarchs in a threatened state, it's important that we test these ideas so that we can either refine our existing conservation practices or correct our understandings so that we can use our limited time and resources more effectively in the conservation of the species. And then go into my hypotheses. I think that is a good outline.