## Transcript Text

Okay, um, this, this is me talking through my understanding of the microclimate hypothesis, uh, for my master's thesis, which relates to overwintering monarch butterflies in California. And, um, what I'm trying to say, I'll just get the thoughts out and then we can structure the narrative as we go. Uh, but essentially there is this idea that within a grove, overwintering monarchs will pick particular spots within that grove to cluster based on a set of abiotic conditions that are especially suitable for the butterflies. Okay. Like that. And then there is enough variation in these abiotic conditions within a grove that these groves are heterogeneous enough that we can see expression of preference in some way. And so what are these microclimate conditions? Well, there's things like temperature, which there's been a lot of great work done on monarchs and how they respond to temperature, relative humidity, because butterflies aren't there to desiccate essentially dappled light. There's evidence to suggest that the pattern of light or light intensity somehow is impactful on the butterflies. And, um, wind protection from wind, where it's thought that los wind speeds are preferable for intuitive reasons. Right. Like butterflies can't imagine butterflies enjoy being whipped around. Okay. So I think I have to really trace how the over the microclimate hypothesis formed. But it's this idea that, um, overwintering groves, through their structure, create these set of, uh, parameters that create suitable conditions for monarchs and that our management practices should try and follow those sets of principles. And uh, yeah, and it's. The problem with the micro climate hypothesis is that it's not fully vetted and tested. There's some issues with it. Um, I mean, I guess like an earlier understanding is that this parameter space, this envelope of acceptable conditions was pretty fixed. It's not, it's not a lot of room for variation there. And uh, butterflies are just looking around for those sets of conditions. But, uh, Kiana and Francis did their study and they certainly, um, weakened the microclimate hypothesis by showing that there's like really no variation in temperature across the grove or humidity. Which makes sense. Right. Like those things are largely solved by the location of the grove and not really changes within the grove. Air temperature is not really expected to vary. Air temperature and relative humidity is really not expected to vary by a lot over meters. Right. Like kilometers. Yes, but even that, not by a ton. And this microclimate hypothesis is really operating at the order of meters, you know, 10 meters. I mean, it could be from one branch to another, you know, like within the same Tree the microclimate hypothesis will suggest that conditions can vary. And they also found that the temperature ranges, uh, or the temperature values could vary quite a bit across scroves on a latitudinal gradient. So in a strict microclimate understanding of monarchs, you would expect to see them uh, conform to an absolute range of temperatures like say around 55 degrees. But that's not what they found, um, that there was actually considerable variation in temperature across the length of California. You know, where you're spanning many, many kilometers instead of meters and yet butterflies will still cluster in those areas. And I think the same is true for maybe not humidity, um, because they all tend to be so coastal maybe. Yeah. M. Who knows? Temperature and humidity correlate pretty high. Um, they, Francis and Kiana looked at variation within the grove as well across this gradient. Didn't find anything special across these like the one known spot compared to a patterned other way. But uh, they did find some evidence that light was meaningfully different at the cluster site versus other sites. And um, unfortunately they didn't answer wind. And wind has become in conservation world. Right, like, which is like what motivates our understanding of the microclimate hypothesis is very much a conservation driven line of inquiry. Because we care about these monarch butterflies, we want to conserve them. Overwintering groves, uh, represent a very critical um, piece of habitat. So within my introduction I need to talk about, at least touch on the entire life history of monarchs, talk about their, their uh, full migration story and um, talk about the need for conservation because they are in such severe decline and depending uh, on their life history, their life history stage, their habitat requirements can vary dramatically. And during the breeding phase of their migration, you know, basically their habitat is all of North America, which presents its own challenges and it's critical in its own ways. Clearly not the focus of my project, uh, but this overwintering stage, which is this baton passing phase of the life history where we have this like super generation that keeps the flame alive of the migration cycle during a period where reproduction is no longer feasible on the landscape because conditions become too cold in much the area. And milkweed, perennial milkweed, dies back and yeah, so they're unable to reproduce, they retreat to these overwintering sites. Um, and all of this is for me to say that like overwintering groves represent this um, very small proportion of their habitat. You know, so it's gotta be, I mean it'd be like a fun statistic but it's gotta be like some hundredths of a percent compared to like North America, you know, an overwintering grove in California or even in Mexico. You know, these are measured on the order of acres, uh, where North America is, who knows how big. So, and so they create this like, really critical habitat that has, um, has a lot of advantages for us. Um, right. It's, it's the best way that we can count butterflies. Uh, in California and the west coast, it's our, really, our only way of understanding how the population is doing is these counts that overwintering grows during the winter. In Mexico, it's the same way. They count them differently because there's just so many. But it does give us some sense of how the population is changing over time. And, um, during the breeding season it's just, there's more, it's more developed on the east coast, the counting methods for that. But in general, like, this is one of the best ways we know how they're doing. Um, but also it's this like, critical habitat for um, monarchs as they, as the next season progresses. Right. So because each monarch butterfly can lay, each female can lay hundreds of eggs, you know, each generation presents the possibility of increasing the population size by, um, several orders of magnitude. This, like compounding interest, um, suggests that how many butterflies are able to successfully reproduce after the overwintering period really sets the stage for how well the population will do overall that next season. And if overwintering groves just disappear completely and there's no alternative, then this whole migration cycle becomes interrupted and we can lose this, uh, phenomenon, you know, which is remarkable in the animal world. Um, it's certainly the most impressive example of migration for invertebrates and among the most, um, I would count among the most like, remarkable natural phenomena that's happening right now. And so the overwintering grove has the advantage of being critical to the outcome of, uh, monarch migration and operating on a much more constricted geographic space, which simply reduces the complexity of, you know, how do you, how do you manage conservation for an insect across all of North America, which involves three different countries and 50 states, or however, continental states, um, that's a significant challenge that people are actually making a lot of progress on, which is encouraging. But we also need to care about the overwintering groves. And that is like, much more constrained, um, at least in California, over half of our overwintering groves are managed by California state parks, which is a supportive partner in conservation. That's a really great thing. And so we're motivated to understand this microclimate hypothesis because that directly informs, it's motivated and informs how monarch butterflies utilize Overwintering groves. The better we can understand that, the better we can manage for these habitats, which are like in decline, which have been in decline since the 80s. They're not doing well. And um, again, critical to the annual migration of monarch butterflies. Okay. Um. So, uh, yeah, so the, the motivation is there. Uh, I think Kingston Leong is. I should really trying to figure that out today. Maybe that's my goal. I, um, think Kingsley Leong is the kind of founding father of the microclimate hypothesis. He did some porn work in the early 90s characterizing these things, wrote a few other papers in the early 2000s and middle 2000s, making these things more explicit. They've become, uh, in lack of like better studies, right. Like these have just become the de facto management practices, the ideas proposed there, but they have not been directly observed. Um, and, um, understanding wind. Right. So the microclimate hypothesis was well, trodden, well explained. Francis Kiana's paper, like really challenged this idea of the microclimate hypothesis. They did not address wind for various reasons. I wish they did. Um, and so. And wind, even at the time of the paper, was widely considered to be the primary abiotic condition that managers could manage for in a grove, um, through the introduction of planting more trees, creating wind buffers. And it created this idea. Uh, Leong proposed this idea of a disruptive wind threshold, which he set at 2 meters per second, roughly 5 miles per hour. And um, that was. Found its way into several management guidelines and was implemented in several restoration plans. You know, I, um, think the most. The largest example of which, um, I think is the restoration of Ella Mesa, where wind simulations were used to, um, help design the. The restoration of, uh, Elwood Main, which has been historically a very important overwintering site for monarch butterflies. Um, of course, the problem is that it's never been tested for how much. You know, it's. It's important that we understand as best we can what monarchs are actually. What are their actual requirements of these overwintering groves. And we should be careful about our understanding. We should check to see if wind is indeed this important characteristic as it's been championed in the past. And that's the whole point of the study was to see does the disruptive wind hypothesis exist, yes or no. And, um, if not, where do we go from there? So I think that's a start. We'll see how that goes.
