Kyle Nessen

knessen@calpoly.edu

BIO 561 -- Winter 2024

# Abstract

Monarch butterflies (*Danaus plexippus*) are one of North America's most
iconic migratory species and are currently at risk of becoming extinct.
Conservation is urgently needed if this species is to recover,
particularly in California where critical overwintering habitat is in
decline. Current best practices in restoration are based on the
"microclimate hypothesis" that characterizes suitable overwintering
habitat as a specific range of abiotic conditions including mild
temperatures, high humidity, dappled sunlight, and low wind speeds.
Recent research, however, finds contradictory evidence to this
hypothesis, and reveals gaps in our knowledge that may lead to poor
management recommendations. In particular, monarch response to strong
winds is largely understudied yet thought to be an important factor in
overwintering behavior. The objective of this study is to investigate
this phenomenon directly by deploying long-term field equipment to
observe clustering butterflies during strong storm conditions. The
results of this research will directly inform the design and
implementation of reforestation of overwintering habitat, helping
migratory monarchs have the best possible chance of persisting long into
the future.

# Introduction

Every fall, millions of monarch butterflies (*Danaus plexippus*) migrate
thousands of miles from their summer breeding grounds in North America,
to overwintering groves along the California coast and the mountains of
Mexico (Tuskes and Brower, 1978; Urquhart and Urquhart, 1978). During
the winter months, monarchs gather in dense "clusters" of up to
thousands of butterflies on a single branch (Frey et al. 1992, Figure
1), creating a display which is unique in the animal kingdom and has
made monarchs a famous and charismatic species (National Geographic,
2022).

Clustering behavior has been demonstrated to provide several benefits to
overwintering monarchs. For example, dense clusters create their own
microclimate, offering protection from freezing events while producing
milder conditions compared to isolated butterflies (Brower et al.,
2008). Additionally, there is safety in numbers for clusters, offering
protection from predatory birds (Brower and Calvert, 1985). Finally, the
presence of clusters may indicate suitable habitat to other individuals
through a process known as emergent sensing (Berdahl et al., 2013).

Research into what constitutes suitable habitat for overwintering
monarchs has produced the "microclimate hypothesis," stating that there
is a specific envelope of abiotic conditions that butterflies seek out.
These conditions include mild ambient temperatures (Chaplin and Wells,
1982), high humidity (Leong et al., 1991), low light intensity (Weiss et
al., 1991), and protection from strong wind events (Leong, 1990; Leong
et al., 1991). All of these conditions facilitate minimum expenditure of
energy by the butterflies, which must persist through the winter months
on lipid reserves from their summer foraging (Chaplin and Wells, 1982).
However, recent research which sought to investigate microclimate
directly found conflicting evidence for this hypothesis. Saniee and
Villablanca (2022) were largely unable to detect significant abiotic
differences from occupied and unoccupied areas within the same grove,
but did find significant differences across groves. Additional work
applying habitat suitability modeling suggests that the macroenvironment
may be more explanatory than microclimate variations within groves
(Fisher et al., 2018). Furthermore, while available wind protection is
widely thought to be an important characteristic of monarch
overwintering habitat, it has only been described in some groves (Leong,
1990), and not empirically tested (Fisher, 2023).

West of the Rocky Mountains in North America, monarch populations have
declined by more than 95% from their historic highs in the 1980's
(Xerces Society Western Monarch Count, 2024). There is considerable
concern among researchers, land managers, and conservation groups that
migrating monarchs could become extinct in the near term (Schultz et
al., 2017; Pelton et al., 2019). In response, the U.S. Fish & Wildlife
Service listed monarchs as "Warranted But Precluded" for federal
endangered status in December 2020 (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
2020), identifying senescence and incompatible management of
overwintering sites in California as one of the primary threats which
warrants listing.

In California, the majority (73% of counted butterflies in 2023) of
overwintering monarchs occur in San Luis Obispo and Santa Barbara
County, almost exclusively in planted *Eucalyptus* groves (Xerces
Society, 2024). Many of the most important sites are subject to
extensive dieback of trees, and millions of dollars are being allocated
to restore lost overwintering habitat (The Monarch Press, 2019).
Restoration plans rely heavily on the microclimate hypothesis,
particularly in creating strong wind buffers through additional planting
of *Eucalyptus* trees (Althouse & Meade, Inc. and Creekside Science,
2023). Leong (1990) identified a critical threshold of \~ 2 m/s where
monarch butterflies begin to become disturbed. This 2 m/s or 5 mph wind
speed has become the standard to meet in all restoration plans. These
restoration plans are expected to take decades before the planted trees
are large enough to become effective in creating suitable habitat and
will cost considerable amounts of money to implement. Thus, it is
critical that our understanding of how monarchs use overwintering
habitat is as near complete as possible to improve the probability
restoration will be successful the first time it is implemented.

# References

Althouse & Meade, Inc. and Creekside Science (2023). Ellwood
Mesa/Sperling Preserve Open Space Monarch Butterfly Overwintering
Habitat Analysis and Recommendations For Restoration. Goleta, CA: City
of Goleta - Public Works Department.

Berdahl, A., Torney, C. J., Ioannou, C. C., Faria, J. J., and Couzin, I.
D. (2013). Emergent Sensing of Complex Environments by Mobile Animal
Groups. *Science* 339, 574--576. doi: 10.1126/science.1225883

Brower, L. P., and Calvert, W. H. (1985). Foraging dynamics of bird
predators on overwinting monarch butterflies in Mexico. *Evolution* 39,
852--868. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.1985.tb00427.x

Brower, L. P., Williams, E., Fink, L., Zubieta, R., and Ram√≠rez, M.
(2008). Monarch butterfly clusters provide microclimatic advantages
during the overwintering season in Mexico. *J. Lepidopterists Soc.* 62,
177--188.

Chaplin, S., and Wells, P. (1982). Energy reserves and metabolic
expenditures of monarch butterflies overwintering in southern
California. *Ecol. Entomol.* 7, 249--256.

Fisher, A. (2023). Overwintering Monarch Butterflies, Climate, and
Climate Change. California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
Obispo.

Fisher, A., Saniee, K., Van der Heide, C., Griffiths, J., Meade, D., and
Villablanca, F. (2018). Climatic Niche Model for Overwintering Monarch
Butterflies in a Topographically Complex Region of California. *Insects*
9, 167. doi: 10.3390/insects9040167

Frey, D., Leong, K. L. H., Fredericks, D., and Raskowitz, S. (1992).
Clustering Patterns of Monarch Butterflies (Lepidoptera: Danaidae) at
Two California Central Coast Overwintering Sites. *Ann. Entomol. Soc.
Am.* 85, 148--153. doi: 10.1093/aesa/85.2.148

Hristov, N. I., Nikolaidis, D., Hubel, T. Y., and Allen, L. C. (2019).
Estimating Overwintering Monarch Butterfly Populations Using Terrestrial
LiDAR Scanning. *Front. Ecol. Evol.* 7. Available at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2019.00266 (Accessed
October 12, 2022).

Leong, K. L. H., Frey, D., Brenner, G., Baker, S., and Fox, D. (1991).
Use of Multivariate Analyses to Characterize the Monarch Butterfly
(Lepidoptera: Danaidae) Winter Habitat. *Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.* 84,
263--267. doi: 10.1093/aesa/84.3.263

Leong, K. L. H., Walker, J. H., Dees, R., and Sletteland, H. (2017). Use
of cluster photographs to estimate overwintering monarch butterfly,
Danaus plexippus Linnaeus, 1758 (Lepidoptera: Danaidae), populations at
selected California overwinter sites. *Pan-Pac. Entomol.* 93, 229--233.
doi: 10.3956/2017-93.4.229

Leong, Kingston. L. H. (1990). Microenvironmental Factors Associated
with the Winter Habitat of the Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Danaidae)
in Central California. *Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.* 83, 906--910. doi:
10.1093/aesa/83.5.906

National Geographic (2022). Nature's Most Impressive Animal Migrations.
Available at:
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/natures-most-impressive-animal-migrations
(Accessed September 4, 2023).

Pelton, E. M., Schultz, C. B., Jepsen, S. J., Black, S. H., and Crone,
E. E. (2019). Western Monarch Population Plummets: Status, Probable
Causes, and Recommended Conservation Actions. *Front. Ecol. Evol.* 7.
Available at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2019.00258 (Accessed
January 11, 2023).

Saniee, K., and Villablanca, F. (2022). Hierarchy and Scale Influence
the Western Monarch Butterfly Overwintering Microclimate. *Front.
Conserv. Sci.* 3. Available at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcosc.2022.844299 (Accessed
May 15, 2023).

Schultz, C. B., Brown, L. M., Pelton, E., and Crone, E. E. (2017).
Citizen science monitoring demonstrates dramatic declines of monarch
butterflies in western North America. *Biol. Conserv.* 214, 343--346.
doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2017.08.019

The Monarch Press (2019). City Awarded \$3.9 Million in Funding for the
Monarch Butterfly Habitat Management Plan. Available at:
https://www.goletamonarchpress.com/2019/06/city-awarded-3-9-million-in-funding-for-the-monarch-butterfly-habitat-management-plan/
(Accessed February 9, 2024).

Tuskes, P. M., and Brower, L. P. (1978). Overwintering ecology of the
monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus L., in California. *Ecol. Entomol.*
3, 141--153. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2311.1978.tb00912.x

Urquhart, F. A., and Urquhart, N. R. (1978). Autumnal migration routes
of the eastern population of the monarch butterfly (*Danaus p*.
*plexippus* L.; Danaidae; Lepidoptera) in North America to the
overwintering site in the Neovolcanic Plateau of Mexico. *Can. J. Zool.*
56, 1759--1764.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (2020). Endangered and Threatened
Wildlife and Plants; 12-Month Finding for the Monarch Butterfly. *Fed.
Regist.* 85, 81813--81822.

Weiss, S. B., Rich, P. M., Murphy, D. D., Calvert, W. H., and Ehrlich,
P. R. (1991). Forest Canopy Structure at Overwintering Monarch Butterfly
Sites: Measurements with Hemispherical Photography. *Conserv. Biol.* 5,
165--175. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1739.1991.tb00121.x

Xerces Society (2024). Western Monarch Count Tallies 233,394
Butterflies. *Xerces Soc.* Available at:
https://www.xerces.org/blog/western-monarch-count-tallies-233394-butterflies
(Accessed February 9, 2024).

Xerces Society Western Monarch Count (2024). Western Monarch
Thanksgiving Count and New Year's Count Data, 1997-2023.
