supplemental/methods/meeting-notes/20250801.md, before:

## Conceptual draft
Everything that is necessary is present
Identify things that are extraneous 
Missing from this draft is a section purely hypotheses and predictions. Very brief
no methods, no justification, no analysis. 
Include the language for hypothesis and predictions that might appear in the introduction
- concise statement of hypotheses integrating with analysis 
- Include 

## AIC model
- Light and temperature and complicating factor
- global model
- wind mdoel + temp
- temp only

## Site fidelity
- Threshold should be a drop in order of magnitude
- We don't know how long it will take for a rebound
- At least one day to the next
- Secondary test. Only do it we support the original hypothesis
- More conservative = fewest assumptions
  - Experienced monarchs will not come back
  - Inexperienced monarchs could come back
  

## Example hypotheses and predictions
“There is such a thing as a disruptive wind to overwintering monarch butterflies” If there is such a thing as disrutpive wind, then we should observe that monarch butterfly abundance at roost site will decrease when exposed to disruptive winds. 

The disruptive wind is anything above 2 m/s. If a a disruptive wind is above 2 m/s, then monarch abundance will decrease at roost sites that experience those winds. 

The disruptiveness of of disruptive winds could change with wind speeds. If the response changes with wind speed, we expect stronger winds to be more disruptive, and will cause a greater decrease in monarch abundance 

The magnitude of a disruptive wind impacts the probability of abandoment. If the probability of abandoment changes with disruptive winds, the chances of abandonment increase with higher wind speeds. 

When monarchs experience a disruptive wind, it influences their roost site fidelity. There will be decreased site fidelity and decreased abundance. 

Hypothesis should be durable across studies. It never changes. It shouldn't matter what kind of data you have. Predictions follow the data of your study. 

## TODO
- Best attempt at explicit hypotheses and predicitions as they might appear in the introduction with the step process. 
- Generate conceptual draft. Add italics or "points of discussion" for content that is just for francis
- Append methods and move statistical sections were appropriate.
- start analysis

Commit message:

add note about hypotheses in meeting notes

supplemental/methods/meeting-notes/20250801.md, after:

## Conceptual draft
Everything that is necessary is present
Identify things that are extraneous 
Missing from this draft is a section purely hypotheses and predictions. Very brief
no methods, no justification, no analysis. 
Include the language for hypothesis and predictions that might appear in the introduction
- concise statement of hypotheses integrating with analysis 
- Include 

## AIC model
- Light and temperature and complicating factor
- global model
- wind mdoel + temp
- temp only

## Site fidelity
- Threshold should be a drop in order of magnitude
- We don't know how long it will take for a rebound
- At least one day to the next
- Secondary test. Only do it we support the original hypothesis
- More conservative = fewest assumptions
  - Experienced monarchs will not come back
  - Inexperienced monarchs could come back
  

## Example hypotheses and predictions
*Note to AI: These are the hypotheses and predictions I generated with my adivsor. The final output should follow closely along these lines, but worth getting them into a more formal, polished state*

“There is such a thing as a disruptive wind to overwintering monarch butterflies” If there is such a thing as disrutpive wind, then we should observe that monarch butterfly abundance at roost site will decrease when exposed to disruptive winds. 

The disruptive wind is anything above 2 m/s. If a a disruptive wind is above 2 m/s, then monarch abundance will decrease at roost sites that experience those winds. 

The disruptiveness of of disruptive winds could change with wind speeds. If the response changes with wind speed, we expect stronger winds to be more disruptive, and will cause a greater decrease in monarch abundance 

The magnitude of a disruptive wind impacts the probability of abandoment. If the probability of abandoment changes with disruptive winds, the chances of abandonment increase with higher wind speeds. 

When monarchs experience a disruptive wind, it influences their roost site fidelity. There will be decreased site fidelity and decreased abundance. 

Hypothesis should be durable across studies. It never changes. It shouldn't matter what kind of data you have. Predictions follow the data of your study. 

## TODO
- Best attempt at explicit hypotheses and predicitions as they might appear in the introduction with the step process. 
- Generate conceptual draft. Add italics or "points of discussion" for content that is just for francis
- Append methods and move statistical sections were appropriate.
- start analysis
