Introduce Kingston's quote as way to identify claims

Add comment in introduction that some of the conclusions that I plan to address could be errorneous or misguided by limitations of technology at the time. 

H3 
wind above disruptive threshold could lead to order magnitude reduction over night

- [ ] Investigate if basking can be pulled out of images

Any reduciton of abundance below flight threshold without basking and without direct light would be due to shivering 

- Something for discussion, that Kingston is possibly right. He could be right for very large clusters, where they cling to each other. 
- Subsume 3 into 2. Now the Kingston interpretation hypothesis. See 2016 paper

- An important part of the sunlight hypothesis now is that they reform after the light has gone away. If they do, that indicates that the light is at play, and the habitat is not necessarily unsuitable. Need to incorporate this reformation for both the kingston and light hypotheses. 

Trying to think through how to test this light response. You have the initial count of hte butterflies in the morning before first direct light. Then perhaps a count after the last direct light. Then the last count of the day? 

Try curve fitting instead
Try to plot the daily curve of sunlight images

Start of day to 30 minutes past last direct light
Lowest count of day to last count 

To get teh reader to the point
Tell reader about wind, kingston, how they should choose to leave and go to other places
Energetically can be really expensive
known that they bask (energetically inexpensive)

Remember the hypothesis and predictions and analytical methods need to be considered together.