VSFB is the thesis
Focus on VSFB 

No more new things until 2026

Week lead time for reviewing pieces for Francis

For review:
First iteration is for content (comments)
Second iteration is for organization and structure (combining paragraphs, order of sentences)
Third iteration is line edits

Don’t over explain. Only what we need to know

After anemometers were installed GPS points were taken on a cell phone. This allowed for navigation and data download during the two data collection seasons, while incorporating location metadata. More precise locations were obtained using laser offset method (expand). Discrepancies between original points and more precise locations (greater than 5 m) resulted in us eliminating four points and to reconfirm.

Vertical elevation as a paragraph. Horizontal position as a separate paragraph.

For next week, clean up Pismo based on the feedback. No figure
Also produce content for VSFB methods rough paragraph
- All of content that I think should be there
- Some or most of the logic 
- No bullet points


See if Vincent can get SC12 done by mid June


Write methods, then results, then conclusions, Then intro

Biotic factors inclfuence abundance 
Also abiotic factors that impact abundance and distribution
Abiotic factors influence invertebrates more (endothermy) 
Heterothermic biology
Abiotic factors correlate 
- Sunlight and temperature
- Wind and temperature
- Sunlight and wind
- Wind and humidity 

There are species in which we think there are key variables
Humidity species, temperature
Are there other species that its thought that wind is the key abiotic factor that correlates presence and abundance


Two predictions
- Butterflies will leave if winds get above a certain threshold
- And butterflies will not return to that location again 

Intro funnel
Abiotic & biotic > abiotic > wind > monarchs > specific study

Elicit research question
What is the available research on abiotic factors that are clearly interconnected, such as wind, that influence the presence of abundance of animals, in particular invertebrates

Pismo due December 15th
